Selective neuronal damage and mossy fiber sprouting may underlie epileptogenesis and spontaneous seizure generation in the epileptic hippocampus. It may be beneficial to prevent their development after cerebral insults that are known to be associated with a high risk of epilepsy later in life in humans. In the present study, we investigated whether chronic treatment with an anticonvulsant, vigabatrin (gamma-vinyl GABA), would prevent the damage to hilar neurons and the development of mossy fiber sprouting. Vigabatrin treatment was started either 1 h, or 2 or 7 days after the beginning of kainic acid-induced (9 mg/kg, i.p.) status epilepticus and continued via subcutaneous osmotic minipumps for 2 months (75 mg/kg per day). Thereafter, rats were perfused for histological analyses. One series of horizontal sections was stained with thionine to estimate the total number of hilar neurons by unbiased stereology. One series was prepared for somatostatin immunohistochemistry and another for Timm histochemistry to detect mossy fiber sprouting. Our data show that vigabatrin treatment did not prevent the decrease in the total number of hilar cells, nor the decrease in hilar somatostatin-immunoreactive (SOM-ir) neurons when SOM-ir neuronal numbers were averaged from all septotemporal levels. However, when vigabatrin was administered 2 days after the onset of status epilepticus, we found a mild neuroprotective effect on SOM-ir neurons in the septal end of the hippocampus (92% SOM-ir neurons remaining; P < 0.05 compared to the vehicle group). Vigabatrin did not prevent mossy fiber sprouting regardless of when treatment was started. Rather, sprouting actually increased in the septal end of the hippocampus when vigabatrin treatment began 1 h after the onset of status epilepticus (P < 0.05 compared to the vehicle group). Our data show that chronic elevation of brain GABA levels after status epilepticus does not have any substantial effects on neuronal loss or mossy fiber sprouting in the rat hippocampus.