Intracellular and single-electrode voltage-clamp recordings were made to investigate the process of membrane dysfunction induced by superfusion with oxygen and glucose-deprived (ischemia-simulating) medium in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons of rat tissue slices. To assess correlation between potential change and membrane dysfunction, the recorded neurons were stained intracellularly with biocytin. A rapid depolarization was produced approximately 6 min after starting superfusion with ischemia-simulating medium. When oxygen and glucose were reintroduced to the bathing medium immediately after generating the rapid depolarization, the membrane did not repolarize but depolarized further, the potential reaching 0 mV approximately 5 min after the reintroduction. In single-electrode voltage-clamp recording, a corresponding rapid inward current was observed when the membrane potential was held at -70 mV. After the reintroduction of oxygen and glucose, the current induced by ischemia-simulating medium partially returned to preexposure levels. These results suggest that the membrane depolarization is involved with the membrane dysfunction. The morphological aspects of biocytin-stained neurons during ischemic exposure were not significantly different from control neurons before the rapid depolarization. On the other hand, small blebs were observed on the surface of the neuron within 0.5 min of generating the rapid depolarization, and blebs increased in size after 1 min. After 3 min, neurons became larger and swollen. The long and transverse axes and area of the cross-sectional cell body were increased significantly 1 and 3 min after the rapid depolarization. When Ca2+-free (0 mM) with Co2+ (2.5 mM)-containing medium including oxygen and glucose was applied within 1 min after the rapid depolarization, the membrane potential was restored completely to the preexposure level in the majority of neurons. In these neurons, the long axis was lengthened without any blebs being apparent on the membrane surface. These results suggest that the membrane dysfunction induced by in vitro ischemia may be due to a Ca2+-dependent process that commences approximately 1.5 min after and is completed 3 min after the onset of the rapid depolarization. Because small blebs occurred immediately after the rapid depolarization and large blebs appeared 1.5-3 min after, it is likely that the transformation from small to large blebs may result in the observed irreversible membrane dysfunction.