We investigated differences between immature and mature hippocampal neurons in their response to deprivation of oxygen and glucose (in vitro ischemia), using intracellular recording techniques from CA1 pyramidal neurons in rat brain slices. The membrane was more depolarized in immature hippocampal CA1 neurons (postnatal day 7, P7) compared with the adult neurons (P140), and the apparent input resistance in immature neurons was higher than that in adult neurons. In immature neurons, the threshold for action potential generation was high, and the peak amplitude of the action potential was low in comparison with adult neurons. A time-dependent inward rectification, at potentials negative than the resting potential, was prominent in neurons of P14 and P21. After P21, the resting membrane potential, the apparent input resistance, and the threshold and the peak amplitude of the action potential did not significantly change with increasing age. In adult neurons, application of ischemia-simulating medium caused irreversible changes in membrane potential consisting of an initial hyperpolarization followed by a slow depolarization and a rapid depolarization. Once the rapid depolarization occurred, reintroduction of oxygen and glucose failed to restore the membrane potential, a state referred to as irreversible membrane dysfunction. In neurons of ages P7 or P14, the initial hyperpolarization was not apparent, whereas a slow depolarization followed by a rapid depolarization was observed. With development of the neurons, the latency for onset of the rapid depolarization became shorter and its maximal slope increased. Moreover, neurons of ages P14 or P21 showed a partial or complete recovery after reintroduction of oxygen and glucose, unlike mature neurons. In summary, the present study has demonstrated that the initial hyperpolarization and rapid depolarization induced by in vitro ischemia is age dependent. The rapid depolarization is not readily produced in the neurons in age less than P21 during ischemic exposure.