Previous studies have demonstrated that remacemide and its desglycinyl metabolite, AR-R 2495AA, reduce neuronal damage in animal models of ischemia, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and traumatic brain injury. The aim of the present study was to investigate whether remacemide hydrochloride also alleviates seizure-induced neuronal damage in a model of status epilepticus induced by the stimulation of the perforant pathway (PP) in the rat. Chronic oral remacemide treatment (3 x 25 mg/kg/day) was started either 2 days before or 2 h after the beginning of PP stimulation (2 mA, 20 Hz, 0.1 ms pulse duration for 60 min). The effects of remacemide treatment on the severity of seizures, electroencephalogram (EEG) parameters, seizure-induced neuronal damage in the temporal lobe regions, and memory impairment were compared to unstimulated and stimulated vehicle-treated controls, and carbamazepine-pre-treated (3 x 40 mg/kg/day) rats. Both remacemide and carbamazepine pretreatments, but not remacemide posttreatment, decreased pyramidal cell damage in the CA3 and CA1 subregions of the hippocampus (P < 0.05). In addition, overall neuronal damage in the extrahippocampal temporal lobe regions (the piriform cortex, entorhinal cortex, and the amygdaloid complex) was milder in remacemide-pretreated rats compared to stimulated control rats (P < 0.01). The neuroprotective effect was most evident on the side contralateral to stimulation. Remacemide or carbamazepine pretreatment had no evident effect on the number or duration of behavioral seizures during PP stimulation. Neither drug altered the spectral parameters of the baseline EEG or prevented status epilepticus-induced EEG slowing observed 2 weeks after PP stimulation. Nor did remacemide or carbamazepine treatment alleviate spatial memory impairment determined in a Morris water-maze task 2 weeks after PP stimulation. Our data provide evidence that pretreatment with remacemide has a moderate neuroprotective effect against status epilepticus-induced neuronal damage.