Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system and is implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. Five human glutamate transporters have been cloned and are responsible for the removal of potentially excitotoxic excess glutamate from the extracellular space. In this study we consider whether there are selective changes in the expression of the glutamate transporters in the medial temporal cortex and hippocampus from temporal lobe epilepsy patients, which might contribute to the development or maintenance of seizures. Since disruption of the glial transporter excitatory amino acid transporter 2 in mice results in lethal spontaneous seizures, we were interested primarily in studying changes in this transporter. Using in situ hybridization we show that there was no reduction in the level of excitatory amino acid transporter 2 encoding messenger RNA in the temporal lobe epilepsy cases compared to post mortem controls and indeed there was a relative increase in content of excitatory amino acid transporter 2 messenger RNA per cell in temporal lobe epilepsy cases. Western blotting showed that there was no change in the excitatory amino acid transporter 2 protein content in temporal lobe epilepsy cases as compared to post mortem controls. A small reduction in the level of the second astroglial transporter protein, excitatory amino acid transporter 1, was observed in temporal lobe epilepsy cases. Surprisingly, immunohistochemical experiments using a polyclonal antiexcitatory amino acid transporter 2 antibody, showed a different localization of this protein in epilepsy derived tissue as compared to post mortem controls although glial markers such as glial fibrillary acidic protein and glutamine synthase showed similar patterns of staining. However, repeating this experiment using control tissue from non-temporal lobe epilepsy biopsies demonstrated that this change in the excitatory amino acid transporter 2 transporter localization occurred post mortem. These data suggest that major changes in the level of expression of the glutamate transporters do not play an important role in the development of human temporal lobe epilepsy but may be implicated the aetiology of other types of epilepsy.