Microtubule-associated protein-2 is the most abundant microtubule-associated protein in the brain and is responsible for morphogenesis and maintenance of the nervous system. In the present experiments, we have examined the localization of microtubule-associated protein-2 in the hypothalamo-neurohypophysial system of the rat using western blots and immunohistochemistry. Two monoclonal antibodies against microtubule-associated protein-2, antibody C and AP20, were used: antibody C recognizes both the high- and low-molecular-weight isoforms of microtubule-associated protein-2; antibody AP20 specifically detects high-molecular-weight microtubule-associated protein-2 only. Western blot analysis revealed expression of high-molecular-weight microtubule-associated protein-2 in the whole brain, hippocampus and whole hypothalamus. While the supraoptic nucleus expressed only high-molecular-weight microtubule-associated protein-2, the adult posterior pituitary predominantly expressed low-molecular-weight microtubule-associated protein-2, which was also seen in the embryonic whole brain. Light microscopic immunohistochemistry revealed that both antibody C and AP20 intensely stained dendrites of the dendritic and somatic zones in the supraoptic nucleus. Double labeling with antibodies against microtubule-associated protein-2 and oxytocin (or vasopressin) demonstrated that microtubule-associated protein-2 was localized in dendrites of magnocellular neurons in the supraoptic nucleus. In the posterior pituitary, however, antibody C stained fine processes and cell bodies of astrocytes, which were identified by an antibody against glial fibrillary acidic protein. Antibody AP20 also stained fine processes of some astrocytes in the posterior pituitary, but the intensity of immunoreactivity with antibody AP20 was weaker than that with antibody C. This result suggests that microtubule-associated protein-2 in astrocytes of the posterior pituitary is predominantly of the low-molecular-weight type. Moreover, western blots revealed low-molecular-weight microtubule-associated protein-2 of the posterior pituitary at a molecular weight slightly higher than embryonically expressed low-molecular-weight microtubule-associated protein-2, indicating that low-molecular-weight microtubule-associated protein-2 in the posterior pituitary is possibly the isoform microtubule-associated protein-2d. The present results demonstrate that astrocytes in the posterior pituitary of adult rats still retain the ability to express the immature variant of microtubule-associated protein-2, low-molecular-weight microtubule-associated protein-2, and its expression is probably linked to structural plasticity.