Phenotypic characterization of cells in conjunction with single-cell mRNA analysis, which yields information regarding expression of multiple genes in individual neurons, facilitates a detailed and comprehensive view of neuronal cell biology. More specifically, the aRNA amplification method has provided an approach to analyze mRNA levels in single cells that have been phenotypically characterized on the basis of electrophysiology, morphology, and/or protein expression. In this way, relative mRNA abundances can be directly assayed from a well-defined population of neurons. The concept of expression profiling led to the development of robotics methods for arraying thousands of cDNAs on microarrays. These cDNA arrays can be screened with labeled aRNA or cDNA to generate a molecular fingerprint of a specific cell type, disease state, or therapeutic efficacy. A broad view of how gene expression is altered in single neurons affected by a particular disease process may provide clues to pathogenetic disease mechanisms or avenues for therapeutic interventions. The use of mRNA profiles to produce diagnostics and therapeutics is called transcript-aided drug design (TADD). When coupled with single-cell resolution, TADD promises to be an important tool in diagnosis of disease states, as well as provide a blueprint on which to develop therapeutic strategies. For example, mRNA abundances in an individual diseased cell may increase, decrease, or remain constant, and thus it is possible that a pharmaceutical alone or in combination with other drugs may be specifically designed to restore mRNA abundances to a normal state. Alternatively, if functional protein levels parallel the mRNA level changes, then drugs targeting the function of the proteins translated from these altered mRNAs may prove to be therapeutic. One promise of such an approach is that information about mRNA abundances that are altered in a diseased cell may provide new therapeutic indications for existing drugs. For example, if the abundance of mRNA for the beta-adrenergic receptor is altered as shown by the microarrays for a particular disease, already available adrenergic receptor agonists or antagonists that had not previously been used in this particular disease paradigm may prove to be therapeutically efficacious. The expression profile of a given cell is a measure of the potential for protein expression. Proteins are generally the functional entities within cells and differences in protein function often result in disease. The ability to monitor the coordinate changes in gene expression, in single phenotypically identified cells, that correlate with disease will provide unique insight into the expressed genetic variability of cells and will likely furnish unforeseen insight into the underlying cellular mechanisms that produce disease etiology.