The insulin-like growth factors-I and -II have neurotrophic properties and act through specific membrane receptors. High levels of binding sites for these growth factors are distributed discretely throughout the brain, being concentrated in the hippocampal formation. Functionally, the insulin-like growth factors, in addition to their growth-promoting actions, are considered to play important roles in normal cell functions, as well as in response to pharmacological or surgical manipulations. In adult rats, we have previously shown that systemic injection of kainate produces an overall decrease, in a time-dependent manner, in insulin-like growth factor-I and -II receptor binding sites in the hippocampus [Kar S. et al. (1997) Neuroscience 80, 1041-1055]. Given the evidence that insulin-like growth factors play a critical role during the early stages of brain development, the present study is a logical extension of this earlier report and established the effect of neonatal kainate injection on the developmental profile of insulin-like growth factor receptors. We have evaluated the time-course alteration of these receptors following systemic injection of kainate to newborn rats. After injection of a sublethal dose of kainate (5 mg/kg, i.p.) to postnatal one-day-old pups, [125I]insulin-like growth factor-I, [125I]insulin-like growth factor-II and [125I]insulin binding sites were studied at different postnatal days (7, 14, 21, 28 and 35) using receptor autoradiography. In the developing hippocampus, insulin-like growth factor-I and insulin binding sites are concentrated primarily in the dentate gyrus and the CA2/CA3 subfields, whereas insulin-like growth factor-II binding is discretely localized to the pyramidal layer and the granular layer of the dentate gyrus. Following kainate injection, we observed a slight increase in insulin-like growth factor-I binding sites in given hippocampal subfields starting at postnatal day 14, being significant at day 21. At later days, a progressive decrease was noted. This transient increase may represent an attempt for neuronal plasticity by up-regulating receptor levels. In contrast, insulin-like growth factor-II and insulin receptor binding sites are found to be decreased in various regions of the hippocampus in kainate-treated pups. Taken together, these results provide further evidence for the existence and differential alterations of insulin-like growth factor-I, insulin-like growth factor-II and insulin receptors in the developing rat hippocampus following kainate-induced lesion, suggesting possible involvement of these growth factors in brain plasticity.