Changes in interneuron distribution and excitatory connectivity have been investigated in animals which had survived 12-14 months after complete forebrain ischemia, induced by four-vessel occlusion. Anterograde tracing with Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin revealed massive Schaffer collateral input even to those regions of the CA1 subfield where hardly any surviving pyramidal cells were found. Boutons of these Schaffer collaterals formed conventional synaptic contacts on dendritic spines and shafts, many of which likely belong to interneurons. Mossy fibres survived the ischemic challenge, however, large mossy terminals showed altered morphology, namely, the number of filopodiae on these terminals decreased significantly. The entorhinal input to the hippocampus did not show any morphological alterations. The distribution of interneurons was investigated by neurochemical markers known to label functionally distinct GABAergic cell populations. In the hilus, spiny interneurons showed a profound decrease in number. This phenomenon was not as obvious in CA3, but the spiny metabotropic glutamate receptor 1alpha-positive non-pyramidal cells, some of which contain calretinin or substance P receptor, disappeared from stratum lucidum of this area. In the CA1 region, somatostatin immunoreactivity disappeared from stratum oriens/lacunosum-moleculare-associated cells, while in metabotropic glutamate receptor 1alpha-stained sections these cells seemed unaffected in number. Other interneurons did not show an obvious decrease in number. In stratum radiatum of the CA1 subfield, some interneuron types had altered morphology: the substance P receptor-positive dendrites lost their characteristic radial orientation, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor 1alpha-expressing cells became extremely spiny. The loss of inhibitory interneurons at the first two stages of the trisynaptic loop coupled with a well-preserved excitatory connectivity among the subfields suggests that hyperexcitability in the surviving dentate gyrus and CA3 may persist even a year after the ischemic impact. The dorsal CA1 region is lost; nevertheless hyperactivity, if it occurs, may have a route to leave the hippocampus via the longitudinally extensive axon collaterals of CA3 pyramidal cells, which may activate the subiculum and entorhinal cortex with a relay in the surviving ventral hippocampal CA1 region.