The role of swelling in hypoxic/ischemic neuronal injury is incompletely understood. We investigated the extent and time course of cell swelling during hypoxia, and recovery of cell volume during reoxygenation, in the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices in vitro. Cell swelling was measured optically and compared with simultaneous measurements of the extracellular DC potential, extracellular [K+], and synaptic transmission in the presence and absence of hypoxic depolarization. Hypoxia-induced swelling consisted of rapid and/or slow components. Rapid swelling was observed frequently and always occurred simultaneously with hypoxic depolarization. Additionally, rapid swelling was followed by a prolonged phase of swelling that was approximately 15 times slower. Less frequently, slow swelling occurred independently, without either hypoxic depolarization or a preceding rapid swelling. For slices initially swelling rapidly, recovery of both cell volume and the slope of field excitatory postsynaptic potentials were best correlated with the duration of hypoxia (r = 0.77 and 0.87, respectively). This was also the case for slices initially swelling slowly (r = 0.70 and 0.58, respectively). In contrast, the degree of recovery of cell volume was the same at 30 or 60 min of reoxygenation, indicating that prolonging the duration of reoxygenation within these limits was ineffective in improving recovery. Spectral measurements indicated that the hypoxia-induced changes in light transmittance were related to changes in cell volume and not changes in the oxidation state of mitochondrial cytochromes. The persistent impairment of synaptic transmission in slices swelling slowly (i.e., without hypoxic depolarization) indicates that swelling may play a role in this injury and that hypoxic depolarization is not required. Additionally, the correlation between the degree of recovery of cell volume and the degree of recovery of synaptic transmission during reoxygenation supports a role for swelling in hypoxic neuronal injury.