Monoclonal antibodies were generated against the adenosine A1 receptor (A1R) purified from rat brain. In immunoblot analyses of purified or partially purified A1R preparations from rat brain, these antibodies recognized a solitary band, the size of which corresponded to that expected for A1R. These antibodies recognized not only the native form of A1R but also the deglycosylated form of A1R. Immunocytochemical analysis of Chinese hamster ovarian cells that were transfected stably with rat A1R cDNA showed that their cell bodies were stained intensely by these antibodies, whereas nontransfected Chinese hamster ovarian cells were not. These antibodies detected the A1R naturally present in the DDT(1)( )MF-2 smooth muscle cells. One of these antibodies (the 511CA antibody) was then used to examine the immunohistochemical distribution of A1Rs in rat forebrain. On light microscopy, A1R immunoreactivity was observed in the cerebral cortex, septum, basal ganglia, hippocampal formation, and thalamus. However, in some regions of the forebrain, regional differences in staining intensity were found as follows: In the cerebral cortex, the strongest immunoreactivity was found in the large pyramidal neurons of layer V. This immunoreactivity was detected in the pyramidal cell bodies, dendrites, and axon initial segments. In the hippocampus, A1R immunoreactivity was detected mainly in the stratum pyramidale. The pyramidal cells in fields CA2-CA3 of the hippocampus were stained more intensely or more clearly than those in field CA1 or the dentate gyrus. More intense A1R immunoreactivity of the apical dendrites was detected in field CA2 compared with other hippocampal fields and the dentate gyrus. Many interneurons of the hippocampus were stained by the 511CA antibody. The subcellular distribution of A1Rs in the forebrain was examined by using a digital deconvolution system and electron microscopy. In the cerebral cortex, the view obtained by removing the background haze by deconvolution revealed that the immunofluoresence-labeled A1Rs were distributed on the surfaces of the cell bodies and dendrites and in the cytoplasm of layer V neurons as small spots. In field CA1, immunoreactivity was detected in the areas surrounding pyramidal cells. Electron microscopy revealed the presence of A1R-immunoreactive products in both the presynaptic terminals and the postsynaptic structures. The specific cellular distribution of A1Rs is consistent with the physiological premise that endogeneously released adenosine exerts control over the excitability of forebrain neurons at both presynaptic and postsynaptic sites through A1Rs.