Prohormone convertase 5 is an endoprotease of the kexin/subtilisin-like family, which has been postulated to play a role in the proteolytic maturation of a variety of pro-peptides in the mammalian brain. In order to gain insight into the functional role of prohormone convertase 5 in the central nervous system, the regional, cellular and subcellular distributions of the enzyme were investigated by immunohistochemistry in rat brain using an N-terminal-directed specific antibody shown previously to recognize both the mature and unprocessed forms of the enzyme. Throughout the brain, prohormone convertase 5 immunoreactivity was concentrated within nerve cell bodies and proximal dendrites. No prohormone convertase 5 immunoreactivity was associated with astrocytes, as confirmed by the absence of prohormone convertase 5 immunolabeling in cells immunopositive for the glial protein S-100alpha. Within neurons, prohormone convertase 5 immunoreactivity was concentrated within the Golgi apparatus, as revealed immunohistochemically within the same sections using antibodies against the medial cisternae protein MG-160. It was also present within small vesicular-like elements distributed throughout the cytoplasm of perikarya and dendrites, but not of axons, as confirmed by its lack of co-localization with the synaptic terminal marker Dynamin-1. These results suggest that prohormone convertase 5 is active within early compartments of the neuronal regulated secretory pathway and that it is unlikely to be released with its processed substrates. At the regional level, prohormone convertase 5-immunoreactive perikarya were distributed extensively throughout the forebrain. The most numerous and intensely labeled were detected in the olfactory bulb, cerebral cortex, globus pallidus, endopeduncular and subthalamic nuclei, septum, diagonal band of Broca, magnocellular and medial preoptic areas, supraoptic and arcuate nuclei of the hypothalamus, and anterodorsal, laterodorsal, paraventricular and reticular nuclei of the thalamus. Moderate to dense neuronal labeling was also evident in the olfactory tubercle, caudate-putamen, claustrum, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, substantia innominata, hippocampus, amygdala, and remaining thalamic and hypothalamic nuclei. This widespread distribution suggests that prohormone convertase 5 is involved in the processing of a variety of neuropeptide and/or neurotrophin precursors in mammalian brain.