The suppression of plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone by very low levels of cortisol is reduced in pregnant adrenalectomized ewes, suggesting that pregnancy reduces the efficacy of the high-affinity corticosteroid receptor. This study was designed to determine the effects of pregnancy on the availability, immunoreactivity, and affinity of both corticosteroid receptors: the high-affinity mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) and the lower-affinity glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Availability was measured in the hypothalamus, pituitary, hippocampus and kidney using a saturation point radioligand binding assay. GR availability was significantly decreased in hippocampal cytosols obtained from pregnant ewes, but did not significantly change in other tissues. This finding is consistent with increased GR activation due to elevated circulating concentrations of cortisol. MR availability significantly increased from undetectable levels in hippocampal cytosols obtained from nonpregnant ewes to 2.8 +/- 1.6 fmol/mg protein in pregnant ewes, suggesting a reduced MR activation in the hippocampus during pregnancy. MR availability tended to be greater in other tissues during pregnancy, but these differences were not significant. The amount of immunoreactive MR (iMR) and GR (iGR) protein was estimated by quantifying Western blots. iGR significantly increased in the pituitary, but did not significantly change in other tissues. In contrast, iMR was significantly increased during pregnancy in all tissues assayed, suggesting that an increased cytosolic MR protein amount contributes to the observed increase in MR availability. Since studies suggest that progesterone is a potent anticorticosteroid, we tested for evidence of endogenous inhibition of binding to MR and/or GR during pregnancy by determining MR and GR affinity in pituitary cytosols obtained from nonpregnant and pregnant ewes. Although there was a tendency towards a decreased affinity of the MR in pregnant ewes, there was no significant change in the K(D) of the pituitary MR or GR during pregnancy. We hypothesize that an alteration in activation and/or autoregulation of the MR during pregnancy, particularly in the hippocampus, may contribute to the observed changes in receptor availability and immunoreactivity and increase basal plasma cortisol levels during pregnancy.