Three-month-old Long-Evans female rats sustained aspirative lesions of the dorsal septohippocampal pathways and, 2 weeks later, received intrahippocampal suspension grafts containing cells from the mesencephalic raphe, cells from the medial septum and the diagonal band of Broca, or a mixture of both. Lesion-only and sham-operated rats were used as controls. All rats were tested for locomotor activity 1 week, 3 and 5 months after lesion surgery, for spatial working memory in a radial maze from 5 to 9 months, and for reference and working memory in a water tank during the 9th month after lesioning. Determination of hippocampal concentration of acetylcholine, noradrenaline, and serotonin was made after completion of behavioral testing. Compared to sham-operated rats, all rats with lesions, whether grafted or not, exhibited increased levels of locomotor activity and made more errors in the radial maze. The lesioned rats were also impaired in the probe trial (30 first seconds) of the water-tank test made according to a protocol requiring intact reference memory capabilities. While rats with septal or raphe grafts were also impaired, the rats with co-grafts showed performances not significantly different from those of sham-operated rats. With a protocol requiring intact working memory capabilities, all lesioned rats, whether grafted or not, were impaired in the water-tank test. In the dorsal hippocampus of lesion-only rats, the concentration of acetylcholine and serotonin was significantly reduced. In rats with septal grafts or co-grafts, the concentration of acetylcholine was close to normal, as was that of serotonin in rats with raphe grafts or co-grafts. These results confirm previous findings showing that co-grafts enabled the neurochemical properties of single grafts to be combined. Data from the water-tank test suggest that cholinergic and serotonergic hippocampal reinnervations by fetal cell grafts may induce partial recovery of spatial reference, but not working memory capabilities in rats.