The perirhinal cortex is crucially involved in various forms of learning and memory. Decrements in neuronal responsiveness occur in the perirhinal cortex with stimulus repetition during visual recognition performance. However, very little is known concerning the underlying mechanisms of synaptic transmission and plasticity in this cortical region. In this study, we provide evidence demonstrating the presence of functional group I, II and III metabotropic glutamate receptors in the rat perirhinal cortex in vitro. Furthermore, the results demonstrate long-lasting synaptic depression in the perirhinal cortex. Extracellular synaptic responses were recorded from superficial layers of the perirhinal cortex directly below the rhinal sulcus, in response to electrical stimuli delivered in the superficial or intermediate layers to the entorhinal or temporal cortex sides of the rhinal sulcus. Evoked synaptic potentials were depressed during bath perfusion of each of the following: the broad-spectrum metabotropic glutamate receptor agonist (1S,3R)-1-aminocyclopentane-1,3-dicarboxylic acid, the selective group I agonist (R,S)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine, the group II agonist (2S,1'R,2'R,3'R)-(2',3'-dicarboxycyclopropyl)glycine and the group III agonist (S)-2-amino-4-phosphonobutanoate. Furthermore, there was a long-lasting depression of synaptic transmission following washout of (1S,3R)-1-aminocyclopentane-1,3-dicarboxylic acid, (R,S)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine or (2S,1'R,2'R,3'R)-(2',3'-dicarboxy-cyclopropyl)glycine. Activation of group III metabotropic glutamate receptors by (S)-2-amino-4-phosphonobutanoate did not result in long-lasting changes in synaptic transmission. Thus, the pharmacological activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors can produce short- or long-term changes in synaptic transmission in the perirhinal cortex. It is possible therefore, that metabotropic glutamate receptors are involved in the decrement in neuronal responsiveness associated with visual recognition in the perirhinal cortex.