According to recent knowledge, apolipoprotein E (apo E) plays a significant role in the homeostasis of intracellular cholesterol level in various tissues. Apo E deficient mice develop hyperlipidemia, and suffer from atherosclerosis in extracerebral blood vessels and neurodegeneration in the central nervous system. Furthermore, Walker et al. (Am. J. Path., 1997;151:1371-1377) demonstrated cerebral xanthomas of various sizes in the brain of apo E deficient mice. In the present study, it is illustrated that in the homozygous apo E deficient mice of advancing age, a great number of foamy macrophages extravasate from microvessels in thalamus and fimbria hippocampi, and scatter in the perivascular regions and migrate toward the ependyma, fimbria hippocampi, hippocampus, and thalamus. Here, it must be pointed out that under hyperlipidemia, although foamy macrophages made clusters in the perivascular region, the cerebral microvessels did not develop atherosclerosis. On the other hand, in the other cerebral regions such as cerebral cortex, caudoputamen, globus pallidus, and substantia nigra, macrophages did not appear and microvessels retained normal shapes, but the fluorescent granular perithelial (in short, FGP) cells accompanied by these vessels contained a certain amount of lipids. That is, in the cerebral cortex and caudoputamen, lipid components are detected in FGP cells and microglia, while in the globus pallidus and substantia nigra, they are mainly localized in astrocytes. The reason why the astrocytes in such defined regions contain, specifically, a high quantity of lipid components remains unsettled. Axonal degenerations are often represented in thalamus, globus pallidus, and substantia nigra. On the other hand, in the specimens of Wild-type mice, lipid components were observed only in FGP cells, and the vascular architecture took a normal profile. Any lipid laden macrophages and the axonal degenerations could not be detected through the cerebral parenchyma. Furthermore, it is also a noticeable finding that immunohistochemically, the FGP cells express a positive reaction against the antibody of apo E in the Wild-type mice, but those of homozygous apo E deficient mice are immunonegative. FGP cells are not only provided with the scavenger receptor, but also contribute to the lipid metabolism in the brain.