Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were used to examine the effects of acute estrogen and progesterone replacement on relative levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) mRNA and protein in different regions of the adult rat brain. Adult ovariectomized animals were killed 53 h after receiving estrogen (E53), 53 h after receiving estrogen and 5 h after receiving progesterone (E53P), or 72 h after receiving estrogen and 24 h after receiving progesterone (E72P). Ovariectomized controls were killed 53 and 72 h after receiving vehicle. Tissues from the hippocampus, pyriform cortex, olfactory bulbs, septum, and nucleus basalis/ventral pallidum were dissected. Tissues from the right hemisphere were processed for quantitative RT-PCR analysis of BDNF mRNA, and tissues from the left hemisphere were processed for the detection and quantification of BDNF protein by ELISA. The results demonstrate significant increases in BDNF mRNA in the pyriform cortex of E53- and E53P-treated animals, as well as an increase in BDNF protein in the pyriform cortex of E72P-treated animals, relative to controls. Significant increases in BDNF mRNA were likewise detected in the hippocampus of E53- and E72P-treated animals, but were accompanied by a significant decrease in BDNF protein in the hippocampus of E53P- and E72P-treated animals relative to controls. No significant changes in BDNF mRNA or protein were detected in the olfactory bulbs, frontal cortex, or nucleus basalis/ventral pallidum following hormone treatment; however, an increase in BDNF protein was detected in the septum of E53-treated animals. This may indicate an increase in the retrograde transport of BDNF from the hippocampus to the septum, which could help account for the decrease in BDNF protein detected in the hippocampus following hormone treatment. These findings demonstrate that hormone replacement significantly affects relative levels of BDNF mRNA and protein within specific regions of the brain. These effects may, in turn, contribute to the effects of estrogen replacement on hippocampal connectivity and cognitive processes that have recently been reported.