We demonstrate here that intracerebroventricular or spinal cord (intrathecal) injection of either plasmid DNA alone or cationic liposome: DNA complexes (CLDCs) produces significant levels of expression of both reporter genes and biologically relevant genes in nonparenchymal cells lining both the brain and the spinal cord. Gene expression was identified both within the spinal cord and the brain after intracerebroventricular or intrathecal injection of either CLDCs or plasmid DNA alone. Intracerebroventricular or intrathecal injection of CLDCs containing the beta-galactosidase (beta-Gal) gene produced patchy, widely scattered areas of beta-Gal expression. The chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene product reached peak levels between 24 hr and 1 week postinjection, and was still present at significant levels 3 weeks after a single intracerebroventricular or intrathecal injection. Intrathecal injection of the human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) gene produced high levels of hG-CSF activity in both the spinal cord and the brain. Intracerebroventricular injection of CLDCs containing the murine nerve growth factor (NGF) gene increased mNGF levels in the hippocampus, a target region for cholinergic neurons in the medial septum, and increased cholinergic neurotransmitter synthetic enzyme choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) activity within the brain, a well-characterized effect of both purified and recombinant NGF protein. These findings indicate that intracerebroventricular or intrathecal injection of CLDCs can produce significant levels of expression of biologically and therapeutically relevant genes within the CNS. Efficient gene transfer into the CNS will facilitate the evaluation of gene function and regulation within the brain and spinal cord. We attempted to transfer and express genes within the brain and spinal cord by direct CNS injection of either DNA alone or CLDCs into the intraventricular and subarachnoid compartments. We show that intracerebroventricular or spinal cord (intrathecal) injection of either plasmid DNA alone or CLDCs produces significant levels of expression of both reporter genes and biologically relevant genes in nonparenchymal cells lining both the brain and the spinal cord. Intrathecal injection of the hG-CSF gene produced high levels of hG-CSF activity in both the spinal cord and the brain. Intracerebroventricular injection of CLDCs containing the murine NGF gene increased mNGF levels in the hippocampus, and increased cholinergic neurotransmitter synthetic enzyme ChAT activity within the brain. Locoregional diffusion of gene products expressed by transfected meningeal lining cells into brain and spinal cord parenchyma could potentially target secreted proteins within brain and spinal cord regions relevant to neuropathological states while limiting peripheral side effects.