The endogenous kappa receptor selective opioid peptide dynorphin has been shown to inhibit glutamate receptor-mediated neurotransmission and voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels. It is thought that dynorphin can be released from hippocampal dentate granule cells in an activity-dependent manner. Since actions of dynorphin may be important in limiting excitability in human epilepsy, we have investigated its effects on voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels in dentate granule cells isolated from hippocampi removed during epilepsy surgery. One group of patients showed classical Ammon's horn sclerosis characterized by segmental neuronal cell loss and astrogliosis. Prominent dynorphin-immunoreactive axon terminals were present in the inner molecular layer of the dentate gyrus, indicating pronounced recurrent mossy fiber sprouting. A second group displayed lesions in the temporal lobe that did not involve the hippocampus proper. All except one of these specimens showed a normal pattern of dynorphin immunoreactivity confined to dentate granule cell somata and their mossy fiber terminals in the hilus and CA3 region. In patients without mossy fiber sprouting the application of the kappa receptor selective opioid agonist dynorphin A ([D-Arg6]1-13, 1 microM) caused a reversible and dose-dependent depression of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels in most granule cells. These effects could be antagonized by the non-selective opioid antagonist naloxone (1 microM). In contrast, significantly less dentate granule cells displayed inhibition of Ca2+ channels by dynorphin A in patients with mossy fiber sprouting (Chi-square test, P < 0.0005). The lack of dynorphin A effects in patients showing mossy fiber sprouting compares well to the loss of kappa receptors on granule cells in Ammon's horn sclerosis but not lesion-associated epilepsy. Our data suggest that a protective mechanism exerted by dynorphin release and activation of kappa receptors may be lost in hippocampi with recurrent mossy fiber sprouting.