The tachykinins are a family of peptides with putative neurotransmitter roles in the nervous system. They mediate their effects via neurokinin-1, neurokinin-2 and neurokinin-3 receptors. There has been increasing interest in the therapeutic application of the tachykinin neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists in the treatment of pain and emesis, and more recently in depression. However, the central role of neurokinin-1 receptors is not well understood. The aims of the present study were to determine the behavioural responses of guinea-pigs, and the distribution of Fos-like immunoreactivity in the guinea-pig brain, following intracerebroventricular administration of the neurokinin-1 receptor-selective agonist, [Sar9,Met(O2)11]substance P. The effects of pretreatment with the neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, SR 140333, were also investigated. Administration of [Sar9,Met(O2)11]substance P induced increased locomotor activity, as well as face washing, grooming and wet-dog shake behaviours, all of which were inhibited by the neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, SR 140333, indicating the involvement of neurokinin-1 receptors. In order to localize the brain regions activated by [Sar9,Met(O2)11]substance P, the distribution of neurons expressing Fos-like immunoreactivity was examined. [Sar9,Met(O2)11]substance P induced increased Fos-like immunoreactivity in widespread areas, including the frontal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus, hypothalamus, periaqueductal gray, area postrema and nucleus of the solitary tract. SR 140333 reduced Fos-like immunoreactivity induced by [Sar9,Met(O2)11]substance P in most areas. Thus, brain regions associated with emotion, sensation, learning and memory, autonomic regulation and emesis were activated by stimulation of neurokinin-1 receptors. The present data have added a functional domain to previous neurokinin-1 receptor localization studies by describing the extensive regions of the CNS that may be activated by stimulation of these receptors, and the potential of neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists to inhibit activation of these regions.