In this study, we investigated the possible contribution of presynaptic group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptor activation to changes in synaptic efficacy by means of analysis of glutamate release in hippocampal synaptosomes. Data were interpreted in the context of group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptor involvement in synaptic plasticity in the CA1 region of freely moving rats. In synaptosomes, 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine enhanced diacylglycerol formation and facilitated vesicular Ca(2+)-dependent glutamate release, whereas trans-azetidine-2,4-dicarboxylic acid had no effect on these processes. Trans-azetidine-2,4-dicarboxylic acid enhanced glutamate release, but in a Ca(2+)-independent manner. This effect was mimicked by the L-glutamate uptake inhibitor L-trans-pyrrolidine-2,4-dicarboxylic acid. (R,S)-alpha-Methyl-4-carboxyphenylglycine blocked the effects of 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine, but not trans-azetidine-2,4-dicarboxylic acid in synaptosomes. Short-term potentiation (100 Hz, three bursts of 10 stimuli, 0.1 ms stimulus duration, 10 s interburst interval) was induced in the CA1 region in vivo. The metabotropic glutamate receptor agonist 1S,3R-aminocyclopentane-2,3-dicarboxylic acid, or the group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptor agonists, 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine and trans-azetidine-2,4-dicarboxylic acid, dose-dependently facilitated short-term potentiation into long-term potentiation, which lasted > 24 h. The facilitation was inhibited by the metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist, (R,S)-alpha-methyl-4-carboxyphenylglycine, and the group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist, (S)-4-carboxy-phenylglycine, but not by the group 2 metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist, (R,S)-alpha-methylserine-O-phosphate monophenyl ester. L-Trans-pyrrolidine-2,4-dicarboxylic acid dose-dependently facilitated short-term potentiation into long-term potentiation, which lasted < 4 h. These data suggest that activation of group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors results in presynaptic modulation of glutamate release. This effect may contribute to group 1 metabotropic glutamate modulation of the expression of long-term potentiation in vivo.