Cholinergic denervation of the hippocampal formation, via medial septal lesions, induces peripheral noradrenergic fibers, originating from the superior cervical ganglion, to grow into the hippocampus. We have previously reported that cholinergic denervation and hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth differentially affect guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate)- as well as guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) + carbachol-stimulated polyphosphoinositide hydrolysis, suggesting an alteration in G proteins and/or the entire receptor complex. To examine the type of G protein which may be involved in these effects, rat dorsal hippocampal membranes were preincubated with pertussis toxin in the presence of guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) and guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) + carbachol. Pertussis toxin reduced guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) in all groups, while guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) + carbachol-stimulated phosphoinositide hydrolysis was reduced in controls and animals without sympathetic ingrowth but not in animals with hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth. This suggests that pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins may be involved in the mediation of phosphoinositide hydrolysis. To confirm this hypothesis, membranes were preincubated with antibodies to Galphao and Gq/11. The Go antibody significantly decreased guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) in all groups, while guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) +carbachol-stimulated phosphoinositide hydrolysis was reduced only in hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth. Impairment of guanosine-5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) and carbachol-stimulated phosphoinositide hydrolysis was also decreased in all groups when preincubated with Gq/11 antibody. To determine whether hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth or cholinergic denervation altered the concentration of various G proteins, immunoblotting methodology was utilized. Gq/11 concentrations were found to be equivalent among groups. The density of Go1, Go2, and Go3 isoforms was significantly increased in the cholinergic denervation, while in the hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth only group Go3 was significantly increased. When assessed as total Go protein, density was increased significantly only in the cholinergic denervation group. Overall, these results suggest that hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth and cholinergic denervation induce alterations in phosphoinositide hydrolysis through both the Gq/11 and the Go proteins and that the coupling between muscarinic receptor and G protein is the possible site which affects changes in phosphoinositide turnover. Our results also suggest that cholinergic denervation and hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth may mediate phosphoinositide hydrolysis through an effect on different isoforms of the same G protein.