Intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) administration of corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) increases the activity of noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus (LC) assessed by electrophysiological and neurochemical studies. It has been suggested that this effect of i.c.v. CRF is exerted directly on LC noradrenergic (LC-NE) neurons. Infusion of CRF directly into the LC increases cortical and hippocampal release of norepinephrine (NE) as indicated by in vivo microdialysis studies, but the electrophysiological studies have shown both increases and decreases. The present study used in vivo voltammetry to study changes in the extracellular concentrations of NE in the rat hippocampus in response to infusion of CRF (100 ng) into the LC. When the infusion cannula was located in or very close to the LC, the immediate response to CRF was a small decrease in the NE-like oxidation current, followed by a robust increase after about 6-7 min. The oxidation current reached a peak around 13 min and returned to baseline by about 30 min after CRF infusion. By contrast with CRF, infusion of glutamate into the LC increased the oxidation current with a delay of around 30 s and a peak within 90 s. The responses to LC infusion of CRF in rats treated with DSP-4 to deplete hippocampal NE were substantially smaller than those in untreated rats, suggesting that the oxidation signals in untreated rats reflected changes in concentrations of NE. The response to glutamate was markedly augmented by pretreatment with the NE reuptake inhibitor, desmethylimipramine, suggesting that the observed responses reflected changes in NE. Infusion of the same dose of CRF into brain structures outside the LC did not elicit consistent changes in oxidation current in the hippocampus. The time course of the responses to CRF is compatible with previously reported electrophysiological responses of LC-NE neurons to CRF and with neurochemical evidence indicating that CRF can affect the activity of LC-NE neurons. The results indicate that CRF may act in or close to the LC to induce release of hippocampal NE, but the delayed response to CRF compared with that to glutamate, suggests that CRF does not directly activate LC-NE neurons.