We showed previously for mice that size differences of the infrapyramidal hippocampal mossy fiber projection (IIP-MF) correlate with spatial learning abilities. In order to clarify the role of the IIP-MF in a natural environment, we studied the bank vole (Clethrionomys glareolus), adapted to a wide range of different habitats, and the root vole (Microtus oeconomus), living in homogenous grassland habitats with small home ranges. Morphometry on Timm-stained horizontal brain sections of six C. glareolus and six M. oeconomus revealed that the size of the entire mossy fiber projection was 42% larger in C. glareolus than M. oeconomus. C. glareolus had also an IIP-MF projection about 230% larger than that of the root vole. A sample of captured animals was then transferred to the laboratory (C. glareolus, n = 23; M. oeconomus, n = 15) and underwent testing for swimming navigation according to a standardized protocol used to assess water maze learning in about 2,000 normal and transgenic mice. Both species learned faster than laboratory mice. Overall escape times showed no differences, but path length was significantly reduced in C. glareolus, which also showed superior performance in a variety of scores assessing spatial search patterns. On the other hand, M. oeconomus showed faster swimming speed, and strong thigmotaxis combined with circular swimming. M. oeconomus also scored at chance levels during the probe trial, about as poorly as mutant knockout mice considered to be deficient in spatial memory. These differences probably reflect differential styles of water maze learning rather than spatial memory deficits: C. glareolus appears to be superior in inhibiting behavior interfering with proper spatial search behavior, while M. oeconomus succeeds in escaping by using rapid circular swimming. We assume that size variations of the IIP-MF correspond to a mechanism stabilizing hippocampal processing during spatial learning or complex activities. This corresponds to the ecological lifestyle of the two species and is in line with previous observations on the role of the IIP-MF.