The neuroactive steroids pregnenolone (3beta-hydroxy-5-pregnen-20-one) and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA, 3alpha-hydroxy-5-androstene-17-one) are negative allosteric modulators of the GABA(A) receptors and positive modulators of acetylcholine, NMDA and sigma(1) receptors. Pregnenolone was recently shown to potentiate the neuronal damage induced by excessive glutamate in cell culture models, whereas dehydroepiandrosterone was reported to present some neuroprotective activity. The in vivo relevance of these effects was investigated in mice submitted to an hypoxic insult, the repeated exposure to carbon monoxide (CO) gas, a model that leads to neurodegeneration in the CA(1) hippocampal area and learning deficits. Recording spontaneous alternation behaviour in the Y-maze assessed short-term memory and long-term memory was examined using a passive avoidance task. After exposure to CO, mice showed a progressive deterioration of their learning ability, reaching significance after 3 days and being maximal after 7 days. Pregnenolone administered before CO significantly facilitated the hypoxia-related deficits, which could be measured 1 day after CO and appeared maximal after 3 days. Dizocilpine blocked the deficits in vehicle- and pregnenolone-treated CO-exposed animals, showing that pregnenolone selectively facilitated the NMDA receptor-dependent excitotoxicity. Dehydroepiandrosterone blocked the appearance of the CO-induced deficits, even after 7 days. Interestingly, the sigma(1) receptor antagonist N, N-dipropyl-2-(4-methoxy-3-(2-phenylethoxy)phenyl)ethylamine (NE-100) failed to affect the dehydroepiandrosterone-induced protection, showing the lack of involvement of sigma(1) receptors. Cresyl violet-stained sections of the mouse hippocampal formation showed that the neurodegeneration observed in the CA(1) area after exposure to CO was augmented by pregnenolone and blocked by dehydroepiandrosterone. These results show that pregnenolone and dehydroepiandrosterone, although being similarly involved in modulating the excitatory/inhibitory balance in the brain, do not equally affect the extent of excitotoxic insults.