BACKGROUND: Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is a 32-kDa stress protein that catalyzes the degradation of heme to biliverdin. HO-1 immunoreactivity is greatly increased in neurons and astrocytes of the hippocampus and cerebral cortex of individuals with AD and colocalizes to senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. METHODS: We investigated whether systemic HO-1 regulation is also deranged in AD patients and whether blood HO-1 measurements provide a peripheral biomarker of the disease. Plasma HO-1 protein levels were measured by competitive ELISA and lymphocyte HO-1 mRNA levels were determined by Northern analysis in patients with early probable sporadic AD, normal elderly controls (NEC), normal younger controls, individuals with age-associated cognitive decline (AACD) not meeting AD criteria, and patients with non-Alzheimer dementia, nondementing neurologic illness, and chronic medical disorders. CSF HO-1 protein concentrations were also determined by ELISA in pathologically confirmed AD and control cases. RESULTS: Mean plasma HO-1 protein concentrations were significantly lower in AD patients (0.85 +/- 0.14 microg/mL) compared with NEC (1.77 +/- 0.34 microg/mL; p < 0.05) and control patients. The AACD group exhibited plasma HO-1 concentrations (1.06 +/- 0.33 microg/mL) intermediate between, but not different from, those of the AD patients and NEC. Lymphocyte HO-1 mRNA levels were lower in the AD cohort relative to NEC (p < 0.001) and individuals with AACD, non-Alzheimer dementia, nondementing neurologic illness, and chronic medical conditions. Lymphocyte HO-1 mRNA levels were also lower in the AACD group relative to NEC (p < 0.05). In comparison with all groups excluding AACD, the sensitivity and specificity of lymphocyte HO-1 mRNA measurement for diagnosis of early sporadic AD are 88% and 75%. Mean CSF HO-1 protein concentrations were lower (p < 0.01) in AD cases (19.07 ng/mL) relative to control values (32.48 ng/mL). CONCLUSIONS: Plasma and CSF HO-1 protein and lymphocyte HO-1 mRNA levels are decreased in subjects with sporadic AD. Quantitative assay for lymphocyte HO-1 mRNA expression may serve as a useful biologic marker in early sporadic AD.