RATIONALE: Gabolysat PC60 is a fish protein hydrolysate with anxiolytic properties commonly used as a nutritional supplement. OBJECTIVE: The diazepam-like effects of PC60 on stress responsiveness of the rat pituitary-adrenal system and on sympathoadrenal activity were studied. METHODS: The activity of the pituitary-adrenal axis, measured by plasma levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and corticosterone (B) of the sympathoadrenal complex, measured by circulating levels of noradrenaline (NA) and adrenaline (A), and the gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) content in the hippocampus and the hypothalamus were investigated in male rats which received daily, by an intragastric feeding tube, for 5 days running either diazepam (1 mg/kg) or PC60 (300 or 1,200 mg/kg). Controls received only solvent (carboxymethylcellulose 1%). Six hours after the last force-feeding, the rats were subjected to 3 min ether inhalation or 30 min restraint and killed by decapitation 30 min after ether stress or at the end of restraint. RESULTS: Baseline plasma levels of ACTH, B, NA and A were not affected by either diazepam or PC60. Both ether- and restraint-induced release of ACTH, but not B, were similarly and drastically reduced by diazepam and PC60 (1,200 mg/kg). Both diazepam and PC60 (1,200 mg/kg) deleted restraint-induced NA and A increases. Both treatments also reduced the ether-induced rise of A. Basal levels of GABA were significantly increased in both the hippocampus and the hypothalamus in PC60-treated rats and only in the hippocampus in diazepam-treated ones. In controls, ether inhalation as well as restraint increased GABA content of these two brain structures. In contrast, such stress procedures performed in PC60-treated rats reduced GABA content slightly in the hippocampus but significantly in the hypothalamus. In diazepam-treated rats, GABA content of the hypothalamus was unaffected by stresses but that of the hippocampus was slightly decreased. CONCLUSIONS: Present data suggest diazepam-like effects of PC60 on stress responsiveness of the rat pituitary adrenal axis and the sympathoadrenal activity as well as GABA content of the hippocampus and the hypothalamus under resting and stress conditions. These effects of PC60 agree with anxiolytic properties of this nutritional supplement, previously reported in both rats and humans.