In the present study, possible mechanisms involved in the tetanus-induced potentiation of gamma-aminobutyric acid-A (GABA-A) receptor-mediated inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) were investigated using the whole cell voltage-clamp technique on CA1 neurons in rat hippocampal slices. Stimulations (100 Hz) of the stratum radiatum, while voltage-clamping the membrane potential of neurons, induces a long-term potentiation (LTP) of evoked fast IPSCs while increasing the number but not the amplitude of spontaneous IPSCs (sIPSCs). The potentiation of fast IPSCs was input specific. During the period of IPSC potentiation, postsynaptic responses produced by 4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisoxazolo[5,4-c]pyridin-3-ol hydrochloride and baclofen, GABA-A and GABA-B agonists respectively, were not significantly different from control. CGP 36742, a GABA-B antagonist, blocked the induction of tetanus-induced potentiation of evoked and spontaneous IPSCs, while GTPgammaS, an activator of G proteins, substitution for GTP in the postsynaptic recording electrode did not occlude potentiation. Since GABA-B receptors work through G proteins, our results suggest that pre- but not postsynaptic GABA-B receptors are involved in the potentiation of fast IPSCs. A tetanus delivered when GABA-A responses were completely blocked by bicuculline suggests that GABA-A receptor activation during tetanus is not essential for the induction of potentiation. Rp-cAMPs, an antagonist of protein kinase A (PKA) activation, blocks the induction of potentiation of fast IPSCs. Forskolin, an activator of PKA, increases baseline evoked IPSCs as well as the number of sIPSCs, and a tetanic stimulation during this enhancement uncovers a long-term depression of the evoked IPSC. Sulfhydryl alkylating agents, N-ethylmaleimide and p-chloromercuribenzoic acid, which have been found to presynaptically increase GABA release and have been suggested to have effects on proteins involved in transmitter release processes occurring in nerve terminals, occlude tetanus-induced potentiation of evoked and spontaneous IPSCs. Taken together our results suggest that LTP of IPSCs originates from a presynaptic site and that GABA-B receptor activation, cyclic AMP/PKA activation and sulfhydryl-alkylation are involved. Plasticity of IPSCs as observed in this study would have significant implications for network behavior in the hippocampus.