This review discusses the experimental and clinical data which indicate that chronic cerebral hypoperfusion can affect metabolic, anatomic, and cognitive function adversely. In aged but not young animals, chronic brain hypoperfusion results in regional pre- and post-synaptic changes, protein synthesis abnormalities, energy metabolic dysregulation, reduced glucose utilization, cholinergic receptor loss, and visuo-spatial memory deficits. Additionally, aging animals that are kept for prolonged periods of time after chronic brain hypoperfusion, also develop brain capillary degeneration in CA1 hippocampus and neuronal damage extending from the hippocampal region to the temporo-parietal cortex where neurodegenerative tissue atrophy eventually forms. All these pathologic events occur in rodents in the absence of senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Alzheimer brains reveal similar biochemical and structural changes as those experimentally induced in aging animals. Moreover, regional cerebral hypoperfusion is one of the earlier (if not the earliest) clinical manifestations in both the sporadic and familial forms of Alzheimer's disease. In addition, therapy that improves or increases cerebral perfusion is generally of some benefit to Alzheimer patients. Conversely, a variety of disorders with different etiologies that impair or diminish cerebral perfusion are reported to be risk factors for this dementia. These findings have prompted us to propose the concept that advanced aging in the presence of a vascular risk factor can converge to create a critically attained threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion (CATCH) that triggers regional brain microcirculatory disturbances and impairs optimal delivery of energy substrates needed for normal brain cell function. The outcome of this defect generates a chain of events leading to the progressive evolution of brain metabolic, cognitive and tissue pathology that characterize Alzheimer's disease. The possible role of CATCH in familial and early onset Alzheimer's disease is briefly discussed from a theoretical vantagepoint. The growing and most recent evidence in support of the CATCH concept is the focus of this review.