The retrochiasmatic area contains the A15 catecholaminergic group and numerous monoaminergic afferents whose discrete cell origins are unknown in sheep. Using tract-tracing methods with a specific retrograde fluorescent tracer, fluorogold, we examined the cells of origin of afferents to the retrochiasmatic area in sheep. The retrogradely labeled cells were seen by observation of the tracer by direct fluorescence or by immunohistochemistry with specific antibodies raised in rabbits or horses. Among the retrogradely labeled neurons, double immunohistochemistry for tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine-beta-hydroxylase, and serotonin were used to characterize catecholamine and serotonin FG labeled neurons. The retrochiasmatic area, which included the A15 dopaminergic group and the accessory supraoptic nucleus (SON), received major inputs from the lateral septum (LS), the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), the thalamic paraventricular nucleus, hypothalamic paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei, the perimamillary area, the amygdala, the ventral part of the hippocampus and the parabrachial nucleus (PBN). Further, numerous scattered retrogradely labeled neurons were observed in the preoptic area, the ventromedial part of the hypothalamus. the periventricular area, the periaqueductal central gray (CG), the ventrolateral medulla and the dorsal vagal complex. Most of the noradrenergic afferents came from the ventro-lateral medulla (Al group), and only a few from the locus coeruleus complex (A6/A7 groups). A few dopaminergic neurons retrogradely labeled with flurogold were observed in the periventricular area of the hypothalamus. Rare serotoninergic fluorogold labeled neurons belonged to the dorsal raphe nucleus. Most of these afferents came from both sides of the brain, except for hypothalamic supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei. In the light of these anatomical data, we compared our results with data obtained from rats, and we discussed the putative role of these afferents in sheep in the regulation of several specific functions in which the retrochiasmatic area may be involved, such as reproduction.