Transplants of fetal midbrain raphe neurons into the adult brain have been shown to promote recovery of complex behavioral deficits in several experimental models, but the mechanisms underlying these effects are only partially understood. In the present study, we have used a well-characterized model system to ascertain whether midbrain raphe graft can display behaviorally relevant changes in transmitter release and/or metabolism. Fetal mesencephalic raphe neurons were grafted unilaterally into the hippocampus previously deprived of its innate serotonergic innervation by intraventricular injections of 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine. The contralateral hippocampus remained as a nongrafted, lesioned control. Microdialysis probes were implanted in the hippocampus 5-7 months postgrafting. Under baseline conditions, extracellular levels of serotonin were similar to normal in the grafted hippocampi, but undetectable on the contralateral, nongrafted side. Levels of the serotonin metabolite, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), were markedly higher than normal in the grafted hippocampi, but dramatically reduced on the contralateral nongrafted side. Handling stimulation (gentle stroking of a rat's fur and tail for 15 min) induced a 64% increase in serotonin output in the intact rats and a small but significant 12% increase in the grafted animals. Non-noxious tail-pinch (15 min) enhanced serotonin release by 86% in the intact rats and 28% in the grafted ones. Extracellular 5-HIAA levels remained unchanged during both handling and tail-pinch in both the intact and the grafted rats. Forced immobilization of the rats for 15 min induced a transient 124% increase in extracellular serotonin levels in the intact rats and a significant 19% increase in the grafted animals, whereas swimming in temperate water (25-30 degrees C; 15 min) induced no detectable changes in serotonin output in any of the groups. 5-HIAA levels remained unchanged during forced immobilization, but were significantly reduced during the swimming session in both the intact (-38%) and grafted (-15%) animals. The present results indicate that median raphe grafts can become functionally integrated in the denervated host hippocampus and respond by altered indole output when the animal is exposed to different types of environmental challenges.