Following cholinergic denervation of the hippocampus by medial septal lesions, an unusual neuronal reorganization occurs in which peripheral adrenergic fibers arising from the superior cervical ganglia grow into the hippocampus (hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth). We have reported previously that cholinergic denervation and hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth differentially affected cholinergically stimulated phosphoinositide hydrolysis, concentration and affinity of muscarinic receptors, Go-protein level and protein kinase C activity. To complete these studies, we determined whether cholinergic denervation and hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth influenced phospholipase C and protein kinase C expression in dorsal hippocampal membranes and cytosol. Using immunoblotting methods, the results showed that the 100,000 mol. wt subunit of phospholipase Cbeta was increased in the membrane fraction in the hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth group by 45% compared to controls and the 150,000 mol.wt subunit was increased by 75% and 59% compared to controls and cholinergic denervation, respectively. For protein kinase C detection, immunoblots were prepared using antibodies selective for "classical" protein kinase C members (alpha, beta, gamma) and for the "novel" protein kinase C subfamily members (delta, &theta;). Membrane protein kinase Cbeta was decreased in hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth by 35% compared to controls and by 41% compared to cytosolic hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth. Membrane protein kinase Cbeta was decreased in cholinergic denervation by 28% compared to controls. When compared to membranes from controls and the cholinergic denervation group, and to cytosolic fractions from the hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth groups, respectively, the following membrane protein kinase isoforms were found to be decreased by hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth: gamma by 55%, 40% and 57%; delta by 91.5%, 70% and 120%; theta; by 95%, 100% and 86%.In conclusion, our results may indicate the connection between the previously reported differential influence of hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth and cholinergic denervation on cholinergically stimulated phosphoinositol hydrolysis. The "normalization" of phosphoinositol hydrolysis found in hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth may be due to the increase in phospholipase Cbeta expression in hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth membrane fractions. Since the activation of protein kinase C is known to block phosphoinositol hydrolysis, hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth "normalization" of phosphoinositol hydrolysis may result from a reduction in protein kinase expression in hippocampal sympathetic ingrowth membranes.