Mental dysfunction including cognitive, behavioural changes, mood disorders, and psychosis are increasingly recognized in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and related disorders. Their morphological correlates are complex due to multiple system degeneration. CNS changes contributing to cognitive changes in PD include 1. Dysfunction of subcorticocortical networks with neuron losses in a) the dopaminergic nigrostriatal loop, causing striato-(pre)frontal deafferentation and mesocortico-limbic system (medial substantia nigra, ventral tegmentum); b) noradrenergic (locus coeruleus), and serotonergic systems (dorsal raphe nuclei), c) cholinergic forebrain system (nucleus basalis of Meynert, etc), and d) specific nuclei of amygdala and limbic system (thalamic nuclei, hippocampus); 2. Limbic and/or cortical Lewy body and Alzheimer type pathologies with loss of neurons and synapses, 3. Combination of subcortical, cortical, and other pathologies. In general, degeneration of subcortical and striato-frontal networks causes cognitive, executive, behavioural, and mood disorders but less severe dementia than cortical changes which, when present in sufficient numbers, are important factors for overt dementia. In PD, cortical tau pathology with similar or differential patterns than in Alzheimer disease (AD) shows significant linear correlation with cognitive decline. In dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), the second most frequent cause of dementia in the elderly, cortical Lewy bodies (LB) may or may not be associated with amyloid plaques and neuritic AD lesions. They predominantly affect the limbic system with less frequent isocortical Braak stages, whereas the cholinergic forebrain system is more severely affected than in AD. Both neuritic degeneration in limbic system in PD and DLB and the density of cortical synapse markers correlate with neuritic AD pathology and less with cortical LB counts. Apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele frequency may represent a common genetic background for both AD and LB pathologies but there are different proportions of plaques between DLB (less Abeta1-40) and AD (more frequent Abeta1-40). Familial parkinsonism with dementia, linked to chromosome 17 (frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism (FTDP-17), and other tauopathies pathologically resembling PD plus AD, are often related to mutations of the tau gene, whereas familial PD with alpha-synuclein and Parkin mutations usually show no cognitive impairment. Mood disorders, in particular depression, and psychotic complications in both PD and DLB are related to complex involvement of noradrenergic and serotonergic systems, not confirmed in AD with depression, and both the prefrontal and limbic dopaminergic systems. The specific contributions of cortical and subcortical pathologies to mental dysfunction in PD and related disorders, their relationship to AD, and their genetic and aetiological backgrounds await further elucidation.