Electroconvulsive therapy, which is used to treat refractory major depression in humans increases seizure threshold and decreases seizure duration. Moreover, the expression of brain derived neurotrophic factor induced by electroshocks (ECS) might protect hippocampal cells from death in patients suffering from depression. As temporal lobe epilepsy is linked to neuronal damage in the hippocampus, we tested the effect of repeated ECS on subsequent status epilepticus (SE) induced by lithium-pilocarpine and leading to cell death and temporal epilepsy in the rat. Eleven maximal ECS were applied via ear-clips to adult rats. The last one was applied 2 days before the induction of SE by lithium-pilocarpine. The rats were electroencephalographically recorded to study the SE characteristics. The rats treated with ECS before pilocarpine (ECS-pilo) developed partial limbic (score 2) and propagated seizures (score 5) with a longer latency than the rats that underwent SE alone (sham-pilo). Despite this delay in the initiation and propagation of the seizures, the same number of ECS- and sham-pilo rats developed SE with a similar characteristic pattern. The expression of c-Fos protein was down-regulated by repeated ECS in the amygdala and the cortex. In ECS-pilo rats, c-Fos expression was decreased in the piriform and entorhinal cortex and increased in the hilus of the dentate gyrus. Neuronal damage was identical in the forebrain areas of both groups, while it was worsened by ECS treatment in the substantia nigra pars reticulata, entorhinal and perirhinal cortices compared to sham-pilo rats. Finally, while 11 out of the 12 sham-pilo rats developed spontaneous recurrent seizures after a silent period of 40+/-27 days, only two out of the 10 ECS-pilo rats became epileptic, but after a prolonged latency of 106 and 151 days. One ECS-pilo rat developed electrographic infraclinical seizures and seven did not exhibit any seizures. Thus, the extensive neuronal damage occurring in the entorhinal and perirhinal cortices of the ECS-pilo rats seems to prevent the establishment of the hyperexcitable epileptic circuit.