Forty-six middle-aged female subjects were scanned using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) during performance of three distinct stages of a working memory task-encoding, rehearsal, and recognition-for both printed pseudowords and visual forms. An expanse of areas, involving the inferior frontal, parietal, and extrastriate cortex, was active in response to stimuli during both the encoding and recognition periods. Additional increases during memory recognition were seen in right prefrontal regions, replicating a now-common finding [for reviews, see Fletcher et al. (1997) Trends Neurosci 20:213-218; MacLeod et al. (1998) NeuroImage 7:41-48], and broadly supporting the Hemispheric Encoding/Retrieval Asymmetry hypothesis [Tulving et al. (1994) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:2016-2020]. Notably, this asymmetry was not qualified by the type of material being processed. A few sites demonstrated higher activity levels during the rehearsal period, in the absence of any new stimuli, including the medial extrastriate, precuneus, and the medial temporal lobe. Further analyses examined relationships among subjects' brain activations, age, and behavioral scores on working memory tests, acquired outside the scanner. Correlations between brain scores and behavior scores indicated that activations in a number of areas, mainly frontal, were associated with performance. A multivariate analysis, Partial Least Squares [McIntosh et al. (1996) NeuroImage 3:143-157, (1997) Hum Brain Map 5:323-327], was then used to extract component effects from this large set of univariate correlations. Results indicated that better memory performance outside the scanner was associated with higher activity at specific sites within the frontal and, additionally, the medial temporal lobes. Analysis of age effects revealed that younger subjects tended to activate more than older subjects in areas of extrastriate cortex, medial frontal cortex, and the right medial temporal lobe; older subjects tended to activate more than younger subjects in the insular cortex, right inferior temporal lobe, and right inferior frontal gyrus. These results extend recent reports indicating that these regions are specifically involved in the memory impairments seen with aging.