The whole-cell GABA-mediated inhibitory postsynaptic currents were studied using the patch-clamp technique on synaptically connected cultured hippocampal neurons. The stimulus-evoked inhibitory postsynaptic currents were recorded in the tetrodotoxin-containing solution in response to the low-amplitude long (10-20ms) extracellular depolarization of a single presynaptic terminal. During each depolarization the postsynaptic response in a form of several superimposed independent events was recorded. The amplitudes of these responses fluctuated randomly, irrespective of the number of the event. In all the investigated neurons the distributions of delays revealed regularly spaced multiple peaks. The number of peaks increased with the duration of stimulus. The distance between the peaks was on average 2.97+/-0.86ms (n=58). The mean intervals between successive releases were distributed exponentially indicating the independence of the release sites. Thus neurotransmitter release might occur with maximal probability at the most probable times irrespective of the presence or failure of the previous event. The increase in stimulating pulse amplitude led to a decrease in the number of clearly detectable peaks in distributions. The decrease in the number of peaks in the distribution of delays was not accompanied with a decrease in the distance between peaks within the range of reliable resolution of the peaks. The amplitude distribution also revealed regularly spaced multiple peaks. The absence of significant correlation between the amplitude of the first and the second event demonstrated the independence of the succeeding release on the preceding release during long stimulation. Results of statistical analysis of our experimental data supports the hypothesis of multiquantal neurotransmitter release in a single inhibitory hippocampal synapse. Neurotransmitter release during long stimulation may occur at certain times with maximal probability, keeping the mean inter-release interval constant. Thus the interval is not determined directly by the depletion of vesicles and the number of vesicles which may be released at the most probable time is random.