Brain-derived neurotrophic factor has been shown to be neuroprotective in models of excitotoxicity, axotomy and cerebral ischemia. The present study evaluated the therapeutic potential of brain-derived neurotrophic factor following traumatic brain injury in the rat. Male Sprague-Dawley rats (N=99) were anesthetized and subjected to lateral fluid percussion brain injury of moderate severity (2.4-2.8 atm) or sham injury. Four hours after injury, the animals were reanesthetized, an indwelling, intraparenchymal cannula was implanted, and infusion of brain-derived neurotrophic factor or phosphate-buffered saline vehicle was initiated from a mini-osmotic pump and continued for two weeks. In Study 1 (N=48), vehicle or 12 microg/day of brain-derived neurotrophic factor was infused into the dorsal hippocampus. In Study 2 (N=51), vehicle or brain-derived neurotrophic factor at a high (12 microg/day) or low dose (1.2 microg/day) was infused into the injured parietal cortex. All animals were evaluated for neurological motor function at two days, one week and two weeks post-injury. Cognitive function (learning and memory) was assessed at two weeks post-injury using a Morris Water Maze. At two weeks post-injury, neuronal loss in the hippocampal CA3 and dentate hilus and in the injured cortex was evaluated. In Study 2, neuronal loss was also quantified in the thalamic medial geniculate nucleus. All of the above outcome measures demonstrated significant deleterious effects of brain injury (P<0.05 compared to sham). However, post-traumatic brain-derived neurotrophic factor infusion did not significantly affect neuromotor function, learning, memory or neuronal loss in the hippocampus, cortex or thalamus when compared to vehicle infusion in brain-injured animals, regardless of the infusion site or infusion dose (P>0.05 for each). In contrast to previous studies of axotomy, ischemia and excitotoxicity, our data indicate that brain-derived neurotrophic factor is not protective against behavioral or histological deficits caused by experimental traumatic brain injury using the delayed, post-traumatic infusion protocol examined in these studies.