A local GABA-system is known to have a mediatory function between several afferents and the principal cells of the hippocampus. This study examines the distribution and fine structure of kappa opioid receptor-immunoreactive elements in the CA1 subfield and reveals some new aspects concerning the structural basis of opioid-GABA interaction in the rat hippocampal formation. Kappa receptors were visualized immunocytochemically with a previously produced and characterized monoclonal antibody, the mAb KA8 (Maderspach, K., Nemeth, K., Simon, J., Benyhe, S., Szucs, M., Wollemann, M., 1991. A monoclonal antibody recognizing kappa-, but not mu- and delta-opioid receptors. J. Neurochem. 56, 1897-1904). The antibody selectively recognizes the kappa opioid receptor with preference to the kappa(2) subtype. Neuronal cell bodies, proximal dendrites and occasionally glial processes surrounding neuronal perikarya were labelled in the CA1 area. The immunopositive cells were present mainly in the stratum oriens, followed by the stratum pyramidale in a rostrocaudally increasing number. Their shape was fusiform, or multipolar. Occasionally kappa receptor-immunoreactive boutons surrounding weakly immunopositive somata were also observed. Electron microscopy of immunopositive neurons showed that the DAB labelling was intensive in the perinuclear cytoplasm. The widths and electron densities of the postsynaptic densities of some axosomatic synapses were remarkably increased. Similar increase of postsynaptic densities were observable at some axodendritic and axospinous synapses. On the basis of their location and fine structural properties the labelled cells are suggested to be GABAergic inhibitory interneurons, probably belonging to the somatostatinergic sub-population. The axons of these inhibitory interneurons are known to arborize in the stratum lacunosum-moleculare where the entorhinal afferents terminate. A modulatory effect of opioids on the entorhinal input, mediated by somatostatinergic interneurons is suggested