Neurodegenerative diseases, traumatic brain injury and stroke are likely to result in cognitive dysfunctioning. Animal models are needed in which these deficits and recovery of the affected functions can be investigated. In the present study, the entorhinal area was chosen as the target for lesioning and for assessing the lesion-induced deficits in the Morris water maze. The entorhinal cortex is regarded as an interface between the hippocampus and neocortex. Deafferentiating the hippocampus through entorhinal lesions impairs spatial learning. The effects of lesions, induced by either electrocoagulation (experiment 1) or ibotenate excitotoxicity (experiment 2), on spatial orientation behaviour were investigated. Water maze performance after unilateral or bilateral ibotenate injections into the entorhinal cortex was studied in the third experiment. In an additional study, the replicability of the spatial learning deficit after lesions induced by bilateral injections of ibotenic acid into the entorhinal cortex was assessed by comparing the results of nine experiments. We found that spatial learning was impaired after bilateral lesions aimed at the entorhinal cortex. The electrolytic lesion technique produced a relatively large sham effect, whereas the excitotoxic lesioning method did not. Unilateral injections of ibotenic acid into the entorhinal cortex did not affect spatial navigation. The ibotenate-induced lesions replicably produced deficits in the Morris tasks. The degree of the induced spatial learning impairments and the effects on the rate of acquisition during training, however, differed between experiments. This result suggests that the fundamental biological diversity between shipments of rats can account for variation in the effects of parahippocampal damage on spatial learning even in highly standardized experimental set-ups. Rats lesioned by bilateral injections of ibotenic acid into the entorhinal cortex provide an interesting and reliable model for investigating cognitive dysfunctions in neurodegenerative diseases, stroke or traumatic brain injury.