Transforming growth factor-beta1 is a multifunctional peptide with increased expression during Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative conditions which involve inflammatory mechanisms. We examined the autoregulation of transforming growth factor-beta1 and transforming growth factor-beta receptors and the effects of transforming growth factor-beta1 on complement C1q in brains of adult Fischer 344 male rats and in primary glial cultures. Perforant path transection by entorhinal cortex lesioning was used as a model for the hippocampal deafferentation of Alzheimer's disease. In the hippocampus ipsilateral to the lesion, transforming growth factor-beta1 peptide was increased >100-fold; the messenger RNAs encoding transforming growth factor-beta1, transforming growth factor-beta type I and type II receptors were also increased, but to a smaller degree. In this acute lesion paradigm, microglia are the main cell type containing transforming growth factor-beta1, transforming growth factor-beta type I and II receptor messenger RNAs, shown by immunocytochemistry in combination with in situ hybridization. Autoregulation of the transforming growth factor-beta1 system was examined by intraventricular infusion of transforming growth factor-beta1 peptide, which increased hippocampal transforming growth factor-beta1 messenger RNA levels in a dose-dependent fashion. Similarly, transforming growth factor-beta1 increased levels of transforming growth factor-beta1 messenger RNA and transforming growth factor-beta type II receptor messenger RNA (IC(50), 5pM) and increased release of transforming growth factor-beta1 peptide from primary microglia cultures. Interactions of transforming growth factor-beta1 with complement system gene expression are also indicated, because transforming growth factor-beta1 decreased C1qB messenger RNA in the cortex and hippocampus, after intraventricular infusion, and in cultured glia. These indications of autocrine regulation of transforming growth factor-beta1 in the rodent brain support a major role of microglia in neural activities of transforming growth factor-beta1 and give a new link between transforming growth factor-beta1 and the complement system. The auto-induction of the transforming growth factor-beta1 system has implications for transgenic mice that overexpress transforming growth factor-beta1 in brain cells and for its potential role in amyloidogenesis.