Infusion of the K(+) channel blocker 4-aminopyridine in the hippocampus induces the release of glutamate, as well as seizures and neurodegeneration. Since an imbalance between excitation and inhibition, as well as alterations of ion channels, may be involved in these effects of 4-aminopyridine, we have studied whether they are modified by drugs that block glutamatergic transmission or ion channels, or drugs that potentiate GABA-mediated transmission. The drugs were administered to anesthetized rats subjected to intrahippocampal infusion of 4-aminopyridine through microdialysis probes, with simultaneous collection of dialysis perfusates and recording of the electroencephalogram, and subsequent histological analysis. Ionotropic glutamate receptor antagonists clearly diminished the intensity of seizures and prevented the neuronal damage, but did not alter substantially the enhancement of extracellular glutamate induced by 4-aminopyridine. None of the drugs facilitating GABA-mediated transmission, including uptake blockers, GABA-transaminase inhibitors and agonists of the A-type receptor, was able to reduce the glutamate release, seizures or neuronal damage produced by 4-aminopyridine. In contrast, nipecotate, which notably increased extracellular levels of the amino acid, potentiated the intensity of seizures and the neurodegeneration. GABA(A) receptor antagonists partially reduced the extracellular accumulation of glutamate induced by 4-aminopyridine, but did not exert any protective action. Tetrodotoxin largely prevented the increase of extracellular glutamate, the electroencephalographic epileptic discharges and the neuronal death in the CA1 and CA3 hippocampal regions. Valproate and carbamazepine, also Na(+) channel blockers that possess general anticonvulsant action, failed to modify the three effects of 4-aminopyridine studied. The N-type Ca(2+) channel blocker omega-conotoxin, the K(+) channel opener diazoxide, and the non-specific ion channel blocker riluzole diminished the enhancement of extracellular glutamate and slightly protected against the neurodegeneration. However, the two former compounds did not antagonize the 4-aminopyridine-induced epileptiform discharges, and riluzole instead markedly increased the intensity and duration of the disharges. Moreover, at the highest dose tested (8mg/kg, i.p.), riluzole caused a 75% mortality of the rats. We conclude that 4-aminopyridine stimulates the release of glutamate from nerve endings and that the resultant augmented extracellular glutamate is directly related to the neurodegeneration and is involved in the generation of epileptiform discharges through the concomitant overactivation of glutamate receptors. Under these conditions, a facilitated GABA-mediated transmission may paradoxically boost neuronal hyperexcitation. Riluzole, a drug used to treat amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, seems to be toxic when combined with neuronal hyperexcitation.