Clenbuterol, a lipophilic beta2-adrenoceptor agonist, was investigated in various seizure models of experimental epilepsy. In the maximal electroshock seizure threshold test, clenbuterol (> or =4 mg/kg i.p.) increased the electroconvulsive threshold for tonic seizures in mice. In the traditional maximal electroshock seizure (MES) test in mice, ED50 values of 11 mg/kg i.p. or s.c. were determined. In both models, the beta2-receptor antagonist ICI 118.551 did not antagonize the anticonvulsant activity of clenbuterol. Combinations of clenbuterol with standard antiepileptics revealed additive anticonvulsant effects. Repeated administration of clenbuterol (5 mg/kg s.c., twice daily for 14 days) to mice did not significantly influence its anticonvulsant potency or the effectiveness of phenobarbital in the MES test. In various chemically-induced seizure tests with tonic convulsions, clenbuterol inhibited or tended to suppress the tonic phase. However, this drug was not effective in preventing clonic seizures in the pentylenetetrazol (85 mg/kg s.c.) seizure threshold test. In the rotarod ataxia test (mice), a minimal "neurotoxic" dose (TD50) of 41 mg/kg i.p. was determined. In unrestrained rats with chronically implanted electrodes in the dorsal hippocampus, clenbuterol (2 mg/kg and 4 mg/kg i.p.) significantly reduced the duration of electrically evoked hippocampal afterdischarges. In amygdala-kindled rats, clenbuterol (5 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg i.p.) reduced the seizure severity to stage 3. Additional studies indicated that clenbuterol (6 mg/kg i.p.) increased the heart rate and decreased the blood pressure, but this drug did not alter the plasma level of the two tested antiepileptics phenobarbital and carbamazepine. Furthermore, in whole-cell voltage-clamp experiments on cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, clenbuterol (1-100 microM) depressed the fast sodium current in a concentration- and frequency-dependent manner. In conclusion, the anticonvulsant effects of higher doses of clenbuterol against generalized tonic-clonic and complex partial seizures seem to be related to the inhibition of voltage-dependent sodium channels and not to the modulation of beta-adrenoceptors.