We have previously shown that tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) participates in the neurotoxicity of microglial conditioned medium (MgCM). Killing of hippocampal neurons by MgCM was prevented by both plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) and anti-tPA antibody. An N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor blocker protected neurons from MgCM, suggesting that this subtype of glutamate receptor is involved. Whereas glutamate receptor-mediated events are important in cerebral ischemia and tPA has previously been shown to enhance excitotoxicity in hippocampus, we hypothesized that tPA would exaggerate oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD) injury in cultures of hippocampal neurons. Dissociated rat hippocampal cells were grown under conditions designed to optimize neuronal growth while minimizing glial replication. At 7--10 days, cultures were subjected to OGD for 2.5 hr. Recombinant human tPA (1,000 IU) was added immediately after OGD. Viability was assessed 24 hr later. Viable, apoptotic, and necrotic cells were classified and quantified based on staining patterns of acridine orange and ethidium bromide under fluorescence microscopy. tPA alone did not alter neuronal integrity. OGD produced significant neuronal death (viability reduced by 45%, P < 0.001). tPA completely protected OGD-exposed cultures. Potential mechanisms of tPA protection were explored. Whereas tPA antibody abolished the protective effect of tPA, its proteolytic inhibitor PAI-1 did not alter the effect. The effect of tPA was tested in separate free radical and excitatory amino acid insults. It did not protect neurons from hydrogen peroxide (1 microM), S-nitro-acetylpenicillamine (10 microM), glutamate (50 microM), or NMDA (10 microM) damage but significantly attenuated injury caused by 250 microM kainate. We conclude that tPA is capable of protecting hippocampal neurons from OGD by a nonproteolytic action. The mechanism of protection was not defined, although attenuation of AMPA/kainate glutamate receptors may play a role.