Rats were submitted to 10-min cardiac arrest, followed by resuscitation and survival for 1 day, 3 days or 1 week. Five regions of interest (CA1 and CA3 sector of hippocampus, dentate gyrus, reticular nucleus of thalamus and parietal cortex) where studied by light and electron microscopy at each of the survival times, and compared with non-ischemic control rats. Cell counts revealed delayed neuronal loss of about 30% after 3 days in both CA1 and CA3 sectors. Ischemic cell changes consisting of cytoplasmic condensation and nuclear pyknosis appeared in these regions on day 7 and --to a lesser degree-- also affected dentate gyrus, the reticular nucleus of thalamus and cerebral cortex. Ultrastructural alterations were evaluated using an ultrastructural injury catalogue. In all brain regions similar, although quantitatively differently expressed, changes occurred except ribosomal disaggregation, which was restricted to neurons of hippocampal CA1 sector on the first day after cardiac arrest. Progressive alterations included swelling of mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, which was most pronounced in CA1 and CA3 sectors of hippocampus, as well as chromatin aggregation and alterations of neuronal volume, which affected mainly the granule cells of dentate gyrus. Other alterations, such as osmiophilic inclusions or the formation of nuclear pore complexes, were transient with a maximum on the first day after cardiac arrest. Treatment with the free-radical scavenger alpha-phenyl-N-tert-butyl nitrone (PBN) suppressed the formation of nuclear pores but otherwise did not markedly change the morphological outcome. In comparison to previous studies of global brain ischemia induced by arterial inflow occlusion of the same duration, the present data demonstrate remarkable preservation of tissue integrity in CA1 sector but also distinct changes in brain regions considered to be resistant to ischemic injury. Morphological alterations of brain after cardiac arrest do not follow the established pattern of selective vulnerability.