We previously proposed that L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) is a neurotransmitter in the CNS. Receptor and transporter molecules for L-DOPA, however, have not been determined. In the present study, in order to localize the uptake sites of L-DOPA in the CNS, we performed autoradiographic uptake studies using L-[14C]DOPA and L-[3H]DOPA in the uptake study on rat brain slice preparations, and further analyzed the properties of L-DOPA uptake. Image analysis of the L-[14C]DOPA autoradiogram showed a unique heterogeneous distribution of uptake sites in the brain. The intensity was relatively high in the cerebral cortex, the hypothalamus, the cerebellum and the hippocampus, while the density was moderate or even low in the striatum and the substantia nigra. L-DOPA and phenylalanine, but not dopamine (10mM) were able to almost completely inhibit the uptake of L-[14C]DOPA to basal levels. Microautoradiographic studies using L-[3H]DOPA revealed accumulation of dense grains in the median eminence, the supraoptic nucleus of the hypothalamus, the cerebral cortex (layer I) and the hippocampus. In the cerebellum, grains formed in clusters surrounding the Purkinje cells. This grain accumulation was concluded to be in Bergmann glial cells, since the morphological pattern of grain accumulation was similar to that of the immunoreactivity of the glutamate aspartate transporter, a marker protein for Bergmann glial cells. In the hippocampus, the grain density significantly decreased under Na(+)-free conditions. In addition, grain density also decreased in the absence of Cl(-). In contrast, grains in the choroid plexus and the ependymal cell layer, were not affected by the absence of Na(+). These findings indicated that the uptake of L-DOPA occurs via various types of large neutral amino acid transport mechanisms. It appears that neuronal and/or glial cells, which take up L-DOPA in a Na(+)-dependent manner, exist in the CNS. Our finding further supports the concept that L-DOPA itself may act as a neurotransmitter or neuromodulator.