Behavioral data indicate that three of the areas which form the parahippocampal region in the rat, i.e., the entorhinal, perirhinal, and postrhinal cortices, have different, although related functions that also differ from those of the hippocampal formation. These functional differences might be related to differences in connectivity, on the one hand with parts of the association cortex, and on the other with the hippocampal formation. In a previous study, we showed the existence of both a direct and an indirect projection from the perirhinal cortex to areas CA1 and subiculum of the hippocampus. Here we present the result of a second study, demonstrating a similarly organized projection from the postrhinal cortex to the subiculum, comprising both a direct and an indirect route. Electrical stimulation of the postrhinal cortex in vivo evoked field potentials throughout the subiculum and the dentate gyrus. Current source density analysis in both the subiculum and dentate gyrus revealed the presence of sink-source pairs, indicative of a synaptic termination. Based on comparison with the sink-source pairs found after stimulation of the medial entorhinal cortex, we conclude that the connection between the postrhinal cortex and the dentate gyrus most likely is formed by a polysynaptic pathway mediated via the medial entorhinal cortex, while the pathway from the postrhinal cortex to the subiculum is likely monosynaptic. In order to substantiate these findings, we carried out several tracer experiments. Anterograde tracer injections in the postrhinal cortex resulted in labeled fibers in limited parts of the subiculum, but no anatomical evidence for a projection of the postrhinal cortex to the dentate gyrus was found. Additional retrograde tracer injections in the subiculum also showed evidence for a direct postrhinal-to-subiculum projection with a strong topological organization. Based on these combined anatomical and electrophysiological data, we conclude that the postrhinal cortex indeed can reach the subiculum via both a direct and an indirect pathway.