We previously reported that the accumulation of blood-borne radiolabelled serum albumin in brain parenchyma increased with aging, especially in senescence-accelerated mice (SAMP8), which showed age-related deficits in learning and memory. In this study, in order to examine morphological events related to the age-related increase of the brain accumulation of serum albumin, the transvascular passage of blood-borne horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and ultrastructural features of microvessels were examined in the hippocampus, cerebellum and pons of SAMP8 and SAMR1 (control) mice. Ultrastructural examination of the hippocampus showed that the staining for HRP was occasionally spreading throughout the parajunctional cytoplasm of the endothelial cell of aged SAMP8 mice, but not in young SAMP8 mice nor in SAMR1 mice. The number of vessels showing the staining reaction for HRP in the parajunctional cytoplasm of the endothelial cells in aged SAMP8 mice increased significantly compared with that in the others. Electron microscopic morphometry showed that there were no significant differences among the number of HRP-positive vesicles per unit area of the endothelial cell cytoplasm in young and old mice of both strains. The staining reaction for HRP was not seen in the basal lamina of microvessels and the perivascular neuropil in all mice examined. Perivascular lipofuscin-like granules and collagen deposits, swelling of astroglial perivascular endfeet and perivascular cells containing foamy, lipid-like droplets were frequently found in several brain regions of aged SAMP8 mice. The perivascular cells with a few lipid-like droplets and more electron-homogeneous lysosomes were occasionally seen in SAMR1 and young SAMP8, while the other findings were scarcely observed in SAMR1 and young SAMP8 mice. These findings suggest that the blood-brain barrier to HRP was preserved in microvessels in three brain regions of SAM mice but the blood microvessels showed some age-related ultrastructural alterations in SAMP8 brains. Uncontrolled passage of HRP through the parajunctional cytoplasm of the endothelial cells may partly contribute to the age-related increase of accumulation of serum albumin in SAMP8 brains.