Status epilepticus (SE)-induced neuronal injury may involve excitotoxicity, energy impairment and increased generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Potential treatment therefore should consider agents that protect mitochondrial function and ROS scavengers. In the present study, we examined whether the spin trapping agent N-tertbutyl-alpha-phenylnitrone (PBN) and the antioxidant vitamin E (DL-alpha-tocopherol) protect levels of high-energy phosphates during SE. In rats, SE was induced by either of two inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase (AChE), the organophosphate diisopropylphosphorofluoridate (DFP, 1.25 mg/kg, sc)- or the carbamate carbofuran (1.25 mg/kg, sc). Rats were sacrificed 1 h or 3 days after onset of seizures by head-focused microwave (power, 10 kW; duration 1.7 s) and levels of the energy-rich phosphates adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and phosphocreatine (PCr) and their metabolites adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and adenosine monophosphate (AMP), and creatine (Cr), respectively, were determined in the cortex, amygdala and hippocampus. Within 1 h of seizure activity, marked declines were seen in ATP (34-60%) and PCr (25-52%). Total adenine nucleotides (TAN = ATP + ADP + AMP) and total creatine compounds (TCC = PCr + Cr) were also reduced (TAN 38-60% and TCC 25-47%). No changes in ATP/AMP ratio were seen. Three days after the onset of seizures, recovery of ATP and PCr was significant in the amygdala and hippocampus, but not in the cortex. Pretreatment of rats with PBN (200 mg/kg, ip, in a single dose), 30 min before DFP or carbofuran administration, prevented induced seizures and partially prevented depletion of high-energy phosphates. Pretreatment with the natural antioxidant vitamin E (100 mg/kg, ip/day for 3 days), partially prevented loss of high energy phosphates without affecting seizures. In controls, citrulline, a product of nitric oxide synthesis, was found to be highest in the amygdala, followed by hippocampus, and lowest in the cortex. DFP- or carbofuran-induced seizures caused elevation of citrulline levels seven- to eight-fold in the cortex and three- to four-fold in the amygdala and hippocampus. These results suggest a close relationship between SE, excitotoxicity and energy metabolism. The involvement of oxidative stress is supported by the findings that DFP and carbofuran trigger an excessive nitric oxide (NO) production in the seizure relevant regions of the brain.