The actions of the trivalent cation Gd(3+) on whole cell AMPA receptor-mediated currents were studied in isolated hippocampal neurons, in nucleated or outside-out patches taken from cultured hippocampal neurons, and on miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) recorded in cultured hippocampal neurons. Glutamate, AMPA, or kainate was employed to activate AMPA receptors. Applications of relatively low concentrations of Gd(3+) (0.1-10 microM) substantially enhanced steady-state whole cell glutamate and kainate-evoked currents without altering peak currents, suggesting that desensitization was reduced. However, higher concentrations (>30 microM) depressed steady-state currents, indicating an underlying inhibition of channel activity. Lower concentrations of Gd(3+) also increased the potency of peak glutamate-evoked currents without altering that of steady-state currents. An ultrafast perfusion system and nucleated patches were then used to better resolve peak glutamate-evoked currents. Low concentrations of Gd(3+) reduced peak currents, enhanced steady-state currents, and slowed the onset of desensitization, providing further evidence that this cation reduces desensitization. In the presence of cyclothiazide, a compound that blocks desensitization, a low concentration Gd(3+) inhibited both peak and steady-state currents, indicating that Gd(3+) both reduces desensitization and inhibits these currents. Gd(3+) reduced the probability of channel opening at the peak of the currents but did not alter the single channel conductance calculated using nonstationary variance analysis. Recovery from desensitization was enhanced, and glutamate-evoked current activation and deactivation were slowed by Gd(3+). The Gd(3+)-induced reduction in desensitization did not require the presence of the GluR2 subunit as this effect was seen in hippocampal neurons from GluR2 null-mutant mice. Gd(3+) reduced the time course of decay of mEPSCs perhaps as a consequence of its slowing of AMPA receptor deactivation although an increase in the frequency of mEPSCs also suggested enhanced presynaptic release of transmitter. These results demonstrate that Gd(3+) potently reduces AMPA receptor desensitization and mimics a number of the properties of the positive modulators of AMPA receptor desensitization such as cyclothiazide.