Previously we have shown that changes in maternal dietary choline are associated with permanent behavioral changes in offspring. Importantly, in adult male rats, feeding a choline-deficient diet increases the localization of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs) in the liver, whereas young adult CDKI knockout mice (p15Ink4B or p27Kip1) exhibit behavioral abnormalities. Thus, maternal dietary choline-CDKI interactions could underlie the changes we observe in fetal hippocampal development and cognitive function in offspring. Here, timed-pregnant rats on embryonic day E12 were fed the AIN-76 diet with varying levels of dietary choline for 6 days, and, on E18, fetal brain sections were collected, and the localization of CDKI proteins was studied using immunohistochemistry and an unbiased image analysis method. In choline-supplemented animals compared to controls, the number of cells with nuclear immunoreactivity for p15Ink4b CDKI protein was decreased 2- to 3-fold in neuroepithelial ventricular zones and adjacent subventricular zones corresponding to the fimbria, primordial dentate gyrus and Ammon's horn regions in the fetal hippocampus. In contrast, maternal dietary choline deficiency significantly decreased nuclear p15Ink4b immunoreactivity in the neuroepithelial layer of the dentate gyrus. Unlike p15Ink4b, the CDKI protein p27Kip1 was observed almost exclusively in the cytoplasm, though the protein was distributed throughout the proliferating and postmitotic zones in the E18 fetal hippocampus. Maternal dietary choline supplementation decreased the cytoplasmic staining intensity for p27Kip1 throughout the fetal hippocampus compared to control animals. Choline deficiency increased the staining intensity of p27Kip1 throughout the hippocampus in association with increased expression of MAP-1 and vimentin proteins. These results link maternal dietary choline availability to CDKI protein immunoreactivity and commitment to differentiation during fetal hippocampal development.