Apolipoprotein E isoforms may have differential effects on a number of pathological processes underlying Alzheimer's disease. Recent studies suggest that the amount, rather than the type, of apolipoprotein E may also be an important determinant for Alzheimer's disease. Therefore, understanding the regulated synthesis of apolipoprotein E is important for determining its role in Alzheimer's disease. We show here that in rat primary hippocampal astrocyte cultures, dibutyryl-cAMP increased apolipoprotein E secretion with time in a dose-dependent manner (to 177% at 48 h) and that retinoic acid potentiated this effect (to 298% at 48 h). Dibutyryl-cAMP also gave a rapid, albeit transient, increase of apolipoprotein E mRNA expression (to 200% at 1 h). In contrast, the protein kinase C activator phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate decreased both apolipoprotein E secretion (to 59% at 48 h) and mRNA expression (to 22% at 1 h). Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate also reversed the effects of dibutyryl-cAMP. Apolipoprotein E secretion was also modulated by receptor agonists for the adenylyl cyclase/cAMP pathway. Isoproterenol (50 nM, a beta-adrenoceptor agonist) enhanced, while clonidine (250 nM, an alpha2-adrenoceptor agonist) decreased, secreted apolipoprotein E. We also analysed the effects of agonists for the phospholipase C/protein kinase C pathway. Arterenol (1 microM, an alpha1-adrenoceptor agonist) and serotonin (2.5 microM) enhanced, whereas carbachol (10 microM, an acetylcholine muscarinic receptor agonist) decreased secreted apolipoprotein E. The effects of these non-selective receptor agonists were modest, probably due to effects on different signalling pathways. Arterenol also potentiated the isoproterenol-mediated increase. We also show that phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and dibutyryl-cAMP have opposite effects on nerve growth factor, as compared to apolipoprotein E, secretion, suggesting that the results obtained were unlikely to be due to a general effect on protein synthesis. We conclude that astrocyte apolipoprotein E production can be regulated by factors that affect cAMP intracellular concentration or activate protein kinase C. Alterations in these signalling pathways in Alzheimer's disease brain may have consequences for apolipoprotein E secretion in this disorder.