1. The whole-cell configuration of the patch-clamp technique was used to study the modulation of giant depolarizing potentials (GDPs) by nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) in CA3 hippocampal neurons in slices from postnatal day (P) 2-6 rats. 2. Bath application of nicotine increased GDP frequency in a concentration-dependent manner. For example, nicotine (0.5-1 microM) enhanced GDP frequency from 0.05 +/- 0.04 to 0.17 +/- 0.04 Hz. This effect was prevented by the broad-spectrum nicotinic receptor antagonist dihydro-beta-erythtroidine (DHbetaE, 50 microM) and partially antagonized by methyllycaconitine (MLA, 50 nM) a competitive antagonist of alpha7 nAChRs. GDP frequency was also enhanced by AR-17779 (100 microM), a selective agonist of alpha7 nAChRs. 3. The GABA(A) receptor antagonist bicuculline (10 microM) and the non-NMDA glutamate receptor antagonist DNQX (20 microM) blocked GDPs and prevented the effects of nicotine on GDPs. In the presence of DNQX, nicotine increased GABA-mediated synaptic noise, indicating that this drug may have a direct effect on GABAergic interneurons. 4. Bath application of edrophonium (20 microM), a cholinesterase inhibitor, in the presence of atropine (1 microM), increased GDP frequency, indicating that nAChRs can be activated by ACh released from the septo-hippocampal fibres. This effect was prevented by DHbetaE (50 microM). 5. In the majority of neurons tested, MLA (50 nM) and DHbetaE (50 microM) reduced the frequency of GDPs with different efficacy: a reduction of 98 +/- 11 and 61 +/- 29 % was observed with DHbetaE and MLA, respectively. In a subset of cells (40 % in the case of MLA and 17 % in the case of DHbetaE) these drugs induced a twofold increase in GDP frequency. 6. It is suggested that, during development, nAChRs modulate the release of GABA, assessed as GDPs, through distinct nAChRs. The rise of intracellular calcium via nAChRs would further strengthen GABA-mediated oscillatory activity. This can be crucial for consolidation of synaptic contacts and for the fine-tuning of the developing hippocampus.