We studied the effects of lidocaine and tetrodotoxin (TTX) on hypoxic changes in CA1 pyramidal neurons to examine the ionic basis of neuronal damage. Lidocaine (10 and 100 microM) and TTX (6 and 63 nM) delayed and attenuated the hypoxic depolarization and improved recovery of the resting and action potentials after 10 min of hypoxia. Lidocaine (10 and 100 microM) and TTX (63 nM) reduced the number of morphologically damaged CA1 cells and improved protein synthesis measured after 10 min hypoxia. Lidocaine (10 microM) attenuated the increase in intracellular sodium (181 vs. 218%) and the depolarization (-21 vs. -1 mV) during hypoxia but did not significantly attenuate the changes in ATP, potassium, or calcium measured at 10 min of hypoxia. Lidocaine (100 microM) attenuated the changes in membrane potential, sodium, potassium, ATP, and calcium during hypoxia. TTX (63 nM) attenuated the changes in membrane potential (-36 vs. -1 mV), sodium (179 vs. 226%), potassium (78 vs. 50%), and ATP (24 vs. 11%) but did not significantly attenuate the increase in calcium during hypoxia. These data indicate that the primary blockade of sodium channels can secondarily alter other cellular parameters. The hypoxic depolarization and the increase in intracellular sodium appear to be important triggers of hypoxic damage independent of their effect on cytosolic calcium; a treatment that selectively blocked sodium influx (lidocaine 10 microM) improved recovery. Our data indicate that selective blockade of sodium channels with a low concentration of lidocaine or TTX improves recovery after hypoxia by attenuating the rise in cellular sodium and the hypoxic depolarization. This blockade improves the resting and action potentials, histologic state, and protein synthesis of CA1 pyramidal neurons after 10 min of hypoxia to rat hippocampal slices. A higher concentration of lidocaine, which also improved ATP, potassium, and calcium concentrations during hypoxia was more potent. In conclusion, the depolarization and increased sodium concentration during hypoxia account for a portion of the neuronal damage after hypoxia independent of changes in calcium.