To determine how hippocampal location-selective discharges might influence downstream structures for navigation, nucleus accumbens neurons were recorded in rats alternating between two tasks guided respectively by lit cues in the maze or by extramaze room cues. Of 144 phasically active neurons, 80 showed significant behavioral correlates including displacements, immobility prior to, or after reward delivery, as well as turning, similar to previous reports. Nine neurons were position-selective, 22 were sensitive to task and platform changes and 40 others were both. Although the accumbens neurons showed the same behavioral correlate in two or four functionally equivalent locations, these responses were stronger at some of these places, evidence for position sensitivity. To test whether position responses were selective for room versus platform cues, the experimental platform was rotated while the rat performed each of the two tasks. This revealed responses to changes in position relative to both platform and room cues, despite the fact that previous studies had shown that place responses of hippocampal neurons recorded in the same task are anchored to room cues only. After these manipulations and shifts between the two tasks, the responses varied among simultaneously recorded neurons, and even in single neurons in alternating visits to reward sites. Again this contrasts with the uniformity of place responses of hippocampal neurons recorded in this same task. Thus accumbens position responses may derive from hippocampal inputs, while responses to context changes are more likely to derive from other signals or intrinsic processing. Considering the accumbens as a limbic-motor interface, we conclude that position-modulated behavioral responses in the accumbens may be intermediate between the allocentric reference frame of position-selective discharges in the hippocampus and the egocentric coding required to organize movement control. The conflicting responses among simultaneously recorded neurons could reflect competition processes serving as substrates for action selection and learning.