The mechanisms generating giant miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) were investigated at the hippocampal mossy fiber (MF) to CA3 pyramidal cell synapse in vitro. These giant mEPSCs have peak amplitudes as large as 1,700 pA (13.6 nS) with a mean maximal mEPSC amplitude of 366 +/- 20 pA (mean +/- SD; 5 nS; n = 25 cells). This is compared with maximal mEPSC amplitudes of <100 pA typically observed at other cortical synapses. We tested the hypothesis that giant mEPSCs are due to synchronized release of multiple vesicles across the release sites of single MF boutons by directly inducing vesicular release using secretagogues. If giant mEPSCs result from simultaneous multivesicular release, then secretagogues should increase the frequency of small mEPSCs selectively. We found that hypertonic sucrose and spermine increased the frequency of both small and giant mEPSCs. The peptide toxin secretagogues alpha-latrotoxin and pardaxin failed to increase the frequency of giant mEPSCs, but the possible lack of tissue penetration of the toxins make these results equivocal. Because a multiquantal release mechanism is likely to be mediated by a spontaneous increase in presynaptic calcium concentration, a monoquantal mechanism is further supported by results that giant mEPSCs were not affected by manipulations of extracellular or intracellular calcium concentrations. In addition, reducing the temperature of the bath to 15 degrees C failed to desynchronize the rising phases of giant mEPSCs. Together these data suggest that the giant mEPSCs are generated via a monovesicular mechanism. Three-dimensional analysis through serial electron microscopy of the MF boutons revealed large clear vesicles (50 to 160 nm diam) docked presynaptically at the MF synapse in sufficient numbers to account for the amplitude and frequency of giant mEPSCs recorded electrophysiologically. It is concluded that release of the contents of a single large clear vesicle generates giant mEPSCs at the MF to CA3 pyramidal cell synapse.