OBJECTS: This study was designed to detect possible alterations in the expression of neurotrophins and trks in kaolin-induced hydrocephalus by in situ hybridization. METHODS AND RESULTS: Sixteen rats were treated by injection of 25 mg kaolin suspended in 0.1 ml of physiological saline into the cisterna magna. Four rats were injected with saline and served as controls. The kaolin-treated rats were divided into two groups studied 1 and 4 weeks after treatment. Rats were anesthetized and killed, and their brains were rapidly dissected and frozen. DNA oligonucleotide probes for nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), and trkA, trkB, and C were labeled with [(35)S]dATP using terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase for in situ hybridization. Hydrocephalic brains were also classified according to the degree of ventricular enlargement. The results observed were as follows. (1) The medial septal and striatal NGF mRNA levels increased with severity in animals. (2) Hippocampal trkB and BDNF mRNA levels increased with time in animals with moderate ventricular enlargement. (3) Expression of hippocampal trkB, trkC, and NT-3 mRNA increased in animals with moderate ventricular enlargement, while it apparently decreased in the large ventricular enlargement group reaching normal ranges. (4) In the corpus callosum there was an apparent increase in NGF, NT-3 and trkC mRNA, but not in trkA, in hydrocephalic animals. NT-3 EIA confirmed the presence of NT-3 protein increases in corpus callosum. It is therefore possible that simultaneous NGF, NT-3, and trkC receptor upregulation occurred in glial elements of the white matter. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that neurotrophins and their receptors are overexpressed in many damaged structures of the severely hydrocephalic brain. There were discrepancies in the distribution of NGF and trkA mRNA, and we hypothesize that NGF mRNA in the damaged white matter structure might be due to the reduced availability of other receptors, such as the low-affinity NGF receptors.