C57 and DBA mice were trained in a crossed maze to assess possible strain differences in place or response learning as a function of training duration (8 or 17 days) and extramaze cueing conditions. The first condition consisted of a diffuse visually cued environment (rich cueing). The second was the same plus an explicit visual cue marking the direction of the baited arm (rich cueing plus cue). The third was a featureless environment (poor cueing). During training, mice were released from the south arm and rewarded in the east arm. Probe trials on which mice were released from the north arm and allowed to choose either the east (place learning) or the west (response learning) arm were given either on the ninth (PT1) or the eighteenth (PT2) days. Strain x context differences in the activation of the dorsal hippocampus and the dorsolateral striatum were examined by analyzing Fos expression following each probe trial. Results first showed that C57 were essentially place-learners, whereas no learning modality was predominant in DBA, except on the PT2 run with the explicit cue available. Examination of Fos expression in C57 trained under "rich cueing" and "rich cueing plus cue" conditions revealed a strong and parallel increase of immunoreactivity in the hippocampus and dorsolateral striatum following PT1 that decreased under PT2. In that strain, the similar time-course variation of Fos expression in both areas suggests a simultaneous involvement of hippocampal- and striatal-based learning mechanisms, even if those controlled by the hippocampus were prevailing on those controlled by the dorsolateral striatum. In DBA mice, however, the absence of any preferential learning modality was associated with 1) a consistent hippocampal activation persistent across probe trials, and 2) a global superior activation of the dorsolateral striatum. Distinct patterns of Fos expression were therefore associated with every strain-specific learning modality. In each strain, however, each modality was found to be remarkably stable, whatever the training duration and the cueing conditions.