Repeated exposures of rat hippocampal slices to short episodes of hypoxia induce a sustained decrease in the threshold of the development of stimulus-evoked epileptiform discharges in CA1 pyramidal neurons. We have previously demonstrated that the K(+)(o)-induced hyperexcitability required functional L-type voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channels and NMDA-receptors, but was independent of AMPA/kainate-receptor activation. As hypoxia/ischaemia can lead to increased K(+)(o), the epileptiform activity observed after exposure to these challenges could also result from high K(+)(o). The purpose of this study was: (i) to determine whether ionotropic glutamate receptors and L-type Ca(2+) channels are involved in the development of epileptiform activity induced by repeated exposures of hippocampal slices to hypoxia; and (ii) to compare the properties of hypoxia- and high K(+)(o)-induced hyperexcitability. Population spike of presynaptic fibres with field excitatory postsynaptic potential from the stratum radiatum, and population spike of CA1 pyramidal neurons from the stratum pyramidale, were recorded simultaneously in the CA1 area of rat hippocampal slices in response to electrical stimulation of the Schaffer collateral/commissural fibres. Repeated, brief hypoxic episodes induced a sustained decrease in the threshold for development of evoked epileptiform discharges that was associated with long-term potentiation of the CA3-CA1 synapses, but without EPSP-spike potentiation (i.e. in contrast to high K(+)(o)-induced hyperexcitability). The selective antagonist of NMDA receptors, D-APV (25 microM), and the selective blocker of L-type Ca(2+) channels, nifedipine (10 microM) depressed the development of hypoxia-induced hyperexcitability. However, in contrast to high K(+)(o)-induced hyperexcitability, hypoxia-induced hyperexcitability was also blocked by the AMPA/kainite-receptor antagonist, CNQX (5 microM). The present findings confirm that repeated, brief episodes of hypoxia, like exposure to high extracellular K(+), can induce a pro-epileptic state in the CA1 neuronal network, but that the mechanisms leading to hyperexcitability are different for the two stimuli.