Argyrophilic grain disease (AgD) is a late-onset dementia morphologically characterized by abundant neuropil grains (ArGs). ArGs are mainly found in the CA1 subfield of the cornu ammonis, entorhinal and transentorhinal cortices, the amygdala and the hypothalamic lateral tuberal nuclei. We have recently shown that abnormally phosphosphorylated tau protein is the main protein constituent of ArGs and that tau is hyperphosphorylated in up to 80p.100 of nerve cels in areas rich in ArGs. We could demonstrate that at least a subset of grains are formed within dendrites and dendritic side-branches of neurons containing hyperphosphylated tau. Morphology of dendrites containing grains suggests that a process of progressive dendritic shrinkage is taking place in neurons bearing ArGs. Furthermore it became apparent that the presence of ArGs is not necessarily associated with a cognitive decline. Our studies on AgD cases with and without dementia suggest that AgD is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder with early subclinical lesions in anterior part of the hippocampal formation. At later stages involvement of more caudal parts of the hippocampal formation generally results in a cognitive decline. Thus, one possible explanation for the dementia observed in some subjects with AgD is that there is a more widepread loss of postsynaptic structures, including synaptic contacts, throughout the hippocampus-entorhinal/parahippocampal complex and the amygdaloid nuclei. Most of the reported AgD cases are associated with neurofibrillary lesions (e.g. neurofibrillary tangles) which are also typical of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, neurofibrillary changes do not exceed early (entorhinal and limbic) Braak stages which generally are not associated with a cognitive decline. Additional neuropathological features of AgD include oligodendroglial tau filamentous inclusions ( coiled bodies ), ballooned neurons and astrocytic tau pathology. The clinical features of AgD are poorly understood. However, preliminary data from retrospective studies suggest that in AgD behavioural disturbances will precede memory failure and memory decline. Furthermore, it has been shown that the ApoEe4 allele does not constitute a risk factor for the development of AgD. In conclusion it seems very likely that AgD is a distinct dementing disorder of old age that has to be distinguished from other tauopathies, e.g. AD, by both morphological and genetic criteria.