PURPOSE: Based on data from brain biopsy samples of patients with pharmacoresistant partial epilepsy, overexpression of the multidrug transporter P-glycoprotein (PGP) in brain capillary endothelium has recently been proposed as a potential mechanism of resistance to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). We examined whether PGP is overexpressed in brain regions of amygdala-kindled rats, a widely used model of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), which is often resistant to AEDs. METHODS: Rats were kindled by stimulation of the basolateral amygdala (BLA); electrode-implanted but nonkindled rats and naive (not implanted) rats served as controls. PGP was determined by immunohistochemistry either 1 or 2 weeks after the last kindled seizure, by using a monoclonal anti-PGP antibody. Six brain regions were examined ipsi- and contralateral to the BLA electrode: the BLA, the hippocampal formation, the piriform cortex, the substantia nigra, the frontal and parietal cortex, and the cerebellum. RESULTS: In both kindled rats and controls, PGP staining was observed mainly in microvessel endothelial cells and, to a much lesser extent, in parenchymal cells. The distribution of PGP expression across brain regions was not homogeneous, but significant differences were found in both the endothelial and parenchymal expression of this protein. In kindled rats, ipsilateral PGP expression tended to be higher than contralateral expression in several brain regions, which was statistically significant in the piriform cortex and parietal cortex. However, compared with controls, no significant overexpression of PGP in capillary endothelial cells or brain parenchyma of kindled rats was seen in any ipsilateral brain region, including the BLA. For comparison with kindled rats, kainate-treated rats were used as positive controls. As reported previously, kainate-induced seizures significantly increased PGP expression in the hippocampus and other limbic brain regions. CONCLUSIONS: Amygdala-kindling does not induce any lasting overexpression of PGP in several brain regions previously involved in the kindling process. In view of the many pathophysiologic and pharmacologic similarities between the kindling model and TLE, these data may indicate that PGP overexpression in pharmacoresistant patients with TLE is a result of uncontrolled seizures but not of the processes underlying epilepsy. It remains to be determined whether transient PGP overexpression is present in kindled rats shortly after a seizure, and whether pharmacoresistant subgroups of kindled rats exhibit an increased expression of PGP. Furthermore, other multidrug transporters, such as multidrug resistance-associated protein, might be involved in the resistance of kindled rats to AEDs.