A mouse line has been developed that expresses low levels of the NMDA R1 (NR1) subunit of the NMDA receptor [Cell 98 (1999) 427]. These NR1 hypomorphic mice represent an experimental model of reduced NMDA receptor function that may be relevant to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. To further characterize the neurobiological phenotype resulting from developmental NMDA receptor hypofunction, regional brain metabolic activity was assessed by autoradiographic analysis of 14C-2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) uptake. In addition, ligand binding to NMDA, AMPA, and kainate receptors was measured by quantitative autoradiography. MK-801 binding to NMDA receptors was reduced markedly throughout the brain of the NR1 hypomorphic mice. However, no alteration in 3H-AMPA or 3H-kainate binding was apparent in any region examined. Neuroanatomically specific alterations in regional 2-DG uptake were observed in the NR1 hypomorphic animals. Reduced relative 2-DG uptake was observed in the medial prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices. Altered patterns of 2-DG uptake were also found in neocortical regions, with selective reductions of uptake in layer 6 in frontal regions of somatosensory and motor cortices. These data indicate alterations in cortical circuitry in the NR1 hypomorphic animals and are consistent with functional imaging studies in chronic schizophrenia patients which typically show reduced frontal cortical metabolic activity. Reduced relative 2-DG uptake was also found in the caudate, accumbens, hippocampus, and select thalamic regions in the NR1-deficient mice. However, in many other brain regions no alteration in 2-DG uptake was observed. The alterations in 2-DG uptake in the NR1 hypomorphic mice were distinctly different compared to those observed after acute challenge with the selective NMDA antagonist MK-801 in wild-type mice. The altered patterns of brain 2-DG uptake in the NR1 hypomorphic mice found in the present work, together with the altered behavioral phenotypes previously described, suggest that the mice may provide a valuable model to study novel therapeutic strategies to counteract the neurobiological consequences of chronic developmental NMDA receptor hypofunction.