This article begins with a review of recent experiments investigating the synaptic efficacy changes occurring in rat dentate gyrus and piriform cortex during an associative olfactory task. In all these experiments, animals were trained to discriminate among an artificial cue, a patterned electrical stimulation distributed to the lateral olfactory tract associated with a water reward, and a natural odor associated with a flash of light. Monosynaptic field potential responses evoked by single electrical stimuli to the lateral olfactory tract were recorded in the ipsilateral piriform cortex before and just after each training session. Monosynaptic field and polysynaptic field potentials evoked by single electrical stimuli applied respectively to the lateral perforant pathway and lateral olfactory tract were also recorded in ipsilateral dentate gyrus. The results showed an increase in synaptic efficacy subsequent to the first training session in the dentate gyrus network when compared with piriform cortex at the later stage of the learning. The early increase of monosynaptic response in the dentate gyrus was observed immediately after the first learning session but disappeared 24 h later. Inversely, a synaptic depression developed across sessions, becoming significant at the onset of the last (fifth) session. The polysynaptic potential recorded in this structure increased substantially when rats began to discriminate the leaming cues, usually after the second or third learning session. Then, from the third to the fifth session, an LTP like-phenomenon appeared in piriform cortex when rats perfectly mastered the associations. Experiments using high-frequency stimulation to prevent changes in gyrus dentatus indicated that the onset of the observed depression was necessary for the learning of the olfactory associations. The fact that hippocampal and cortical neuronal networks exhibited different timing in synaptic efficacy changes could physiologically explain learning and memory processes.