Synapses in the CA1 region of the hippocampus undergo bidirectional synaptic modification in response to different patterns of activity. Postsynaptic Ca2+ elevation can trigger either synaptic strengthening or weakening, depending on the properties of the local Ca2+ signal. During the pairing protocol for long-term potentiation (LTP) induction, the cell is depolarized under voltage-clamp and is given low-frequency synaptic stimulation. As an initial step toward understanding the Ca2+ dynamics during this process, we used confocal microscopy to study the Ca2+ signals in spines evoked by the depolarization itself. This depolarization activates voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels (VDCC), but whether these channels inactivate rapidly or remain functional throughout the long depolarizations used in the pairing protocol remains unknown. Cells were depolarized to 0 mV for 2-3 min. This depolarization led to a large initial elevation of Ca2+ in spines that never decayed back to resting levels. The maintained signal was close to the Kd of the low-affinity (5 microM) Ca2+ dye, Magnesium Green. We attempted to determine the functional role of this elevation, using the Ca2+-channel blocker D-890. The addition of D-890 in the internal solution produced a nearly complete abolition of the Ca2+ elevation during depolarization. Under these conditions, the NMDA conductance was normal, but LTP was almost completely blocked. This might suggest the importance of VDCC in LTP; however, we found that high concentrations of D-890 can directly inhibit calmodulin protein kinase II (CaMKII), an enzyme required for LTP induction. Thus, whereas D-890 is a useful tool for blocking postsynaptic VDCC, it cannot be used to study the contribution of these channels to plasticity. We conclude that the activation of VDCC produces a large and persistent elevation of Ca2+ in all spines, but does not produce either LTP or long-term depression (LTD) in the absence of synaptic stimulation. The possible reasons for this are discussed.