Detection of two biogenic amine neurotransmitters, serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine (NE) within the CA1 region of the hippocampus (HPC) of behaving male laboratory animals (Rattus norvegicus), was performed with miniature carbon sensors (BRODERICK PROBES) and in vivo semidifferential microvoltammetry after acute administration of the soluble immune factor, human recombinant, interleukin (IL) 1alpha (10 and 100 ng/kg i.p.). Two animal models were compared, i.e., (a) the Sprague-Dawley (SD) model, a strain neither biochemically nor immune-challenged and (b) the Fawn-Hooded (FH) model, a biochemically (5-HT-deficient) and immune-challenged animal. Open-field behaviors, locomotion (ambulations) and stereotypy (fine movements of sniffing and grooming) were monitored with infrared photobeams while 5-HT and NE were selectively and separately detected within seconds in real time. Subchronic studies were performed in the same animals 24 h later at which time no further drug was administered. Results from acute treatment studies showed that IL-1alpha altered HPC monoamines and behavior viz-a-viz habituation values (baseline) in the SD strain differently from those in the FH strain as follows: (1) although 5-HT release was significantly increased within CA1 region of HPC in both SD and FH strains (P<.0001), the extent of the HPC 5-HT increase in the 5-HT-deficient FH strain was significantly less than that of the SD strain at both doses (P<.0001). The subchronic studies showed that 5-HT release within the HPC in the SD strain significantly increased (135%) over drug treatment values (P<.001), whereas HPC 5-HT release in the FH strain remained the same as that seen in the acute drug treatment studies; the difference between strains for the subchronic study was also statistically significant (P<.01). (2) IL-1alpha significantly decreased HPC NE release in the SD strain (P<.0004) while IL-1alpha decreased HPC NE release in the FH strain only at the 10-ng/kg dose (P<.001); at the 100-ng/kg dose in the FH strain, NE rebounded towards baseline and increased 15% above baseline reaching statistical significance (P<.05). Subchronic studies in the SD strain showed a further decreased NE signal to 38% below baseline (P<.0001), whereas subchronic studies in the FH strain showed a significant increase in NE release (P<.02). The difference between strains in the subchronic NE studies was significant (P<.001). (3) Ambulations were increased after IL-1alpha administration in acute studies in both the SD and the FH strains, but the increase did not reach statistical significance, whereas in the subchronic studies, both strains exhibited significant increases as revealed by post hoc analyses (P<.05). There was a statistically significant difference between strains in acute studies (P<.001), whereas no significant differences between models were seen in ambulation behavior in subchronic studies. (4) Fine movements increased over baseline after IL-1alpha administration in both animal models in acute studies, however, results did not reach statistical significance, likely due to the episodic effect of IL-1alpha on movement behavior in both the SD and the FH strains. However, the SD strain showed a significant increase in fine movement behavior during the subchronic studies (P<.02). Significant differences in fine movements between animal models were not observed either acutely or in subchronic studies. In summary, the data show that immune modulation by IL-1alpha affects HPC neurochemistry and behavior in SD versus FH animal models differently and/or to different degrees. The data show that while the FH animal model is subsensitive to 5-HT agonists, 5-HT function can be stimulated. Comparison of genetically diverse animal models provides a reliable means to identify and discern cytokine-induced depressive versus stressor properties. Selective sensor technology provides a powerful tool as movement behavior is monitored and interpreted as a function of monoamine neurotransmission.