A number of recent studies have demonstrated that a well-known form of short-term plasticity at hippocampal GABAergic synapses, called depolarization-induced suppression of inhibition (DSI), is in fact mediated by the retrograde actions of endocannabinoids released in response to depolarization of the postsynaptic cells. These studies suggest that endogenous cannabinoids may play an important role in regulating inhibitory tone in the mammalian CNS. Despite the widespread interest and potential physiological importance of DSI, many questions regarding the physiological relevance of DSI remain. To that end, this study set out to define the specific limiting conditions that could elicit DSI at GABAergic synapses in CA1 hippocampal pyramidal neurons and to determine if DSI could be elicited with pulse trains that mimic hippocampal cell-firing patterns that occur in vivo. Whole cell recordings from hippocampal neurons under voltage-clamp configuration were made in rat hippocampal slices. Spontaneous and evoked gamma-aminobutyric acid-A (GABAA) receptor-mediated inhibitory postsynaptic currents (sIPSCs and eIPSCs, respectively) were recorded prior to and following depolarization of CA1 hippocampal pyramidal cells. Depolarizing voltage pulses were shaped to evoke currents in QX-314-treated cells similar to those accompanying single spontaneous voltage-clamped action potentials recorded from the soma. Attempts were made to elicit DSI with trains of these pulses that mimicked hippocampal cell firing patterns in vivo, for instance, when animals traverse place fields or are performing a short-term memory task. DSI could not be elicited by such pulse trains or by a number of other combinations of behaviorally specific firing parameters. The minimum duration of depolarization necessary to elicit DSI in hippocampal neurons determined by paired-pulse manipulation was 50 -75 ms at a critical interval of 20 -30 ms between pulse pairs. Under the conditions tested, the normal firing patterns of hippocampal neurons that occur in vivo do not appear to elicit DSI.