Altered function of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the brain has recently been associated with an idiopathic form of partial epilepsy, suggesting that functional alterations of these receptors can be involved in the processes leading to epileptic seizures. Thus, nicotinic acetylcholine receptors may form a novel target for antiepileptic drug development. In the present study, various nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists, including novel amino-alkyl-cyclohexane derivatives, were evaluated in two animal models, namely the maximal electroshock seizure test in mice and amygdala-kindling in rats. For comparison with these standard models of generalized and partial seizures, the effects against nicotine-induced seizures were examined. Because some of the agents tested showed an overlap between channel blocking at nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and NMDA receptors, the potency at these receptors was assessed by using patch clamp in a hippocampal cell preparation. Preferential nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists were potent anticonvulsants in the maximal electroshock seizure test and against nicotine-induced seizures. The anticonvulsant potency in the maximal electroshock seizure test was decreased by administration of a subconvulsant dose of nicotine. Such a potency shift was also seen with selective NMDA receptor antagonists, which were also efficacious anticonvulsants against both maximal electroshock seizures and nicotine-induced seizures. Experiments with agents combining nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and NMDA receptor antagonistic effects suggested that both mechanisms contributed to the anticonvulsant effect of the respective agents in the maximal electroshock seizure test. This was not found in kindled rats, in which nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists exerted less robust effects. In conclusion, it may be suggested that nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonism might be a valuable therapeutic approach to treat generalized epileptic seizures but rather not complex partial seizures.