PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to develop a new animal model of pharmacoresistant temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) by repeated intramuscular injection of Coriaria lactone (CL) at subthreshold dosages and to explore the mechanisms that might be involved. METHODS: Healthy male Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 160) were randomized into four groups during the kindling process: three groups (n = 50 for each group) received CL injection at subthreshold dosages (1.25, 1.5, and 1.75 mg/kg, respectively), and ten received normal saline (NS) injection as a control group. The maximal human adult dosage of carbamazepine (CBZ), valproate (VPA), and phenytoin (PHT) was administered as monotherapy to different groups of kindled rats for 1 month (n = 20 for each group). Changes in EEG recording, seizure number, intensity (expressed as grade 1-5 according to Racine stage), and duration, including spontaneous seizures during different interventions, were compared. The expression of P-170, a multiple drug resistance gene (MDR1) encoding P-glycoprotein, was measured in brain samples from different groups of experimental rats by using an image analysis and measurement system (ImagePro-Plus 4.0). RESULTS: A total of 70 (46.7%) rats were fully kindled with a median of 15 (seven to 20) CL injections. Electrocorticogram (ECoG) including hippocampal (EHG) monitoring revealed the temporal lobe origins of epileptiform potentials, which were consistent with the behavioral changes observed. Spontaneous seizures occurred with frequency and diurnal patterns similar to those of human TLE. The antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) tested lacked a satisfactory seizure control. The maximal P-170 expression was in the kindled rats with AED treatment; the next highest was in the kindled rats without AED intervention. Nonkindled SD rats with CL injection also had increased P-170 expression compared with control SD rats. CONCLUSIONS: The study provided a simple and stable animal TLE kindling model with pharmacoresistant properties. The pharmacoresistance observed in the kindled rats to CBZ, VPA, and PHT at maximal human adult dosages together with the increased P-170 expression was a distinct feature of this model. This model might be used in further investigations of the mechanisms involved in pharmacoresistant TLE and for developing new AEDs.