Metallothionein-III (MT-III) a brain-specific member of metallothionein family contributes to zinc neuronal homeostasis, and zinc is an important regulator of many brain functions, including the activity of hormone realising factors by hippocampus. Among them, somatostatin is pivotal because affecting thyroid hormones turnover and consequently thymic and peripheral immune efficiency (Natural Killer, NK) cell activity. Somatostatin is in turn affected by somatomedin-C, which is also zinc-dependent. Therefore, somatomedin-C may be a marker of somatostatin status in the hippocampus. MTs sequester and release zinc in transient stress, as it may occur in young age, to protect cells by reactive oxygen species. In order to accomplish this task, MTs are induced by IL-6 for a prompt immune and anti-inflammatory response. During ageing, MTs are high with a role of sequester of zinc, but with very limited role in zinc release because stress-like condition and inflammation is persistent. Therefore, high MTs may become to protective in young age to harmful during ageing leading to low zinc ion bioavailability for many body homeostatic mechanisms, including brain function. As a consequence, an altered physiological cascade from the brain (upstream) to endocrine and immune system (downstream) may occur. The aim of this work is to study the role of MT-III in the interrelationships among brain-endocrine-immune response in ageing and successful ageing. The main results are: (1) MT-III and IL-6 gene expressions increase in the hippocampus from old mice, in comparison with young and very old mice. (2) Somatomedin-C plasma levels decrease in old mice in comparison with young and very old mice. (3) Low zinc ion bioavailability (tested by the ratio total thymulin/active thymulin) is coupled with altered thyroid hormone turnover and depressed IL-2 in old mice in comparison with young and very old mice. (4) 'In vitro' experiments display more increments on NK cells activity by adding zinc-bound active thymulin than T3 alone. In conclusion, low MT-III in the hippocampus from young and very old mice leads to good zinc ion bioavailability that it is upstream coupled with normal hippocampal function affecting downstream normal thyroid hormones turnover and satisfactory NK cell activity, via complete saturation of zinc-bound active thymulin molecules. Therefore, a correct MTs homeostasis is pivotal for brain-endocrine-immune response in order to reach successful ageing.