To explore the role of NO in the induction of brain ischemic tolerance (BIT) in vivo, the effect of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) inhibitor L-NAME on the induction of BIT induced by cerebral ischemic preconditioning (CIP) was investigated in the hippocampal CA1 subfield in CIP and ischemic insult models established by rat four-vessel occlusion using brain tissue section and thionine staining methods. Fifty-four male Wistar rats were divided into 6 groups: (1) sham-operated group (n=6): bilateral common arteries were separated without occluding the cerebral blood flow; (2) ischemia group (n=6): an ischemic insult for 10 min was given; (3) CIP+ischemia group (n=6): 3-min CIP was preformed 72 h prior to 10-min ischemic insult; (4) L-NAME group (total n=24, n=6 for each subgroup): L-NAME (5 mg/kg, i.p.) was administered 1 h prior to CIP and 1, 12 and 36 h after CIP, respectively. Other procedures were the same as those for the CIP+ischemia group; (5) L-NAME+L-Arg group (n=6): L-NAME (5 mg/kg, i.p.) and L-Arg (300 mg/kg, i.p.) were administered 1 h prior to CIP, other procedures were the same as those for the L-NAME group; (6) L-NAME+ischemia group (n=6): L-NAME (5 mg/kg, i.p.) was administered 72 h before the 10-min ischemic insult. The results showed that (1)10-min ischemic insult resulted in an increase in the histological grade (indicating a more serious tissue injury) and a decrease in pyramidal neuronal density (P<0.01); (2) the histological grade and neuronal density in hippocampal CA1 in the CIP+ischemia group were similar to those in the sham-operated group (P>0.05); (3) in the L-NAME group, administration of L-NAME brought about an increase in the histological grade and a decrease in neuronal density (P<0.01), suggesting that L-NAME blocked the protection of CIP; (4) the neuronal damage in L-NAME+L-Arg group was slighter than that in the L-NAME group, but still more serious than that in the CIP+ischemia group, suggesting that L-Arg partly reversed the blocking effect of L-NAME; (5) the morphological representations in L-NAME+ischemia group were basically similar to those in the ischemia group. The results mentioned above indicate that NO is involved in the induction of BIT in vivo. The blocking effect of L-NAME administered at 36 h after CIP was obviously weaker than the effects of L-NAME administered 1 h prior to CIP, and 1 or 12 h after CIP. It is suggested that NO is involved in the induction of BIT at an early stage and that the involvement might take place via activating cascades of the events.