Previously, we have shown that Lewis (LEW) rats acquire faster than Fischer 344 (F344) rats operant food- and morphine-reinforced tasks under fixed-ratio schedules of reinforcement. The first purpose of the present work has been to study if differences in operant responding behavior may participate in the reported differences in morphine self-administration behavior between both inbred rat strains. To this end, we have analyzed the microstructure of responding obtained under a variable-interval (VI) of food reinforcement by calculating the inter-response time (IRT) for each rat strain. LEW rats exhibited shorter IRTs than F344 rats, suggesting that LEW rats may have an inherent high or compulsive operant responding activity. When subjects of both inbred rat strains were submitted to a schedule of morphine reinforcement of high responding requirements such as progressive ratio schedules, LEW rats also reached significantly higher breaking points and final response ratio than F344 rats for i.v. morphine self-administration. Given that there are neurochemical differences between both rat strains and that glutamatergic N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and dopaminergic D(1) receptors have been involved in operant responding behavior, a second purpose of this work has been to measure basal NMDA and D(1) receptor levels in these rat strains by quantitative receptor autoradiography. Compared to F344 rats, LEW rats showed higher basal NMDA receptor levels in frontal and cingulate cortex, caudate putamen, central amygdaloid nuclei, and intermediate white layer of superior colliculus, and higher basal D(1) receptor levels in several areas of hippocampus and thalamus, and substantia nigra pars reticulata. Taken together, these results suggest that an inherent high operant responding activity of LEW rats may have a role in the previous reported faster acquisition of opiate-reinforced behavior in operant self-administration paradigms under fixed-ratio schedules of reinforcement. In addition, a basal higher NMDA and D(1) receptor levels of LEW rats compared to F344 rats may participate in the neurochemical background that mediates the behavioral differences between both inbred rat strains.