Inhibitory interneurons are important components of the cornu ammonis 1 (CA1) network, as they are strategically positioned to control network information transfer. We investigated in detail synaptic input to individual CA1 interneurons (mainly basket and bistratified cells) after the local circuit was activated through the Schaffer-Commissural pathway and related this input to the population activity of the pyramidal cells. Synaptic responses were measured under whole-cell voltage clamp and population activity was determined from local field potentials. The synaptic input that was evoked in CA1 interneurons fell into two distinct groups. Disynaptic input with a long latency always started after the population spike with a mean latency of 3.0+/-0.3 ms (n=22) in respect to the peak of the population spike. This type of synaptic input to the interneurons was causally linked to the occurrence and amplitude of the population spike and most likely driven by CA1 pyramidal cells. Short-latency monosynaptic input occurred 0.8+/-0.2 ms (n=18) before the peak of the population spike. Its timing was strictly linked to the stimulus and showed significantly less jitter than long-latency input. In the absence of a population spike only short-latency input could be observed. Whether an interneuron receives direct monosynaptic Schaffer input or disynaptic input from the pyramidal cell population determines when that interneuron will be recruited in the network after Schaffer collateral stimulation. In addition, we found that the relation between the strength of the synaptic input and the population activity was different for the two types of input. Short-latency monosynaptic input showed large sensitivity to input changes at stimulus intensities that evoked little activity in the pyramidal cell population. In contrast, the amplitude of the long-latency disynaptic input to the interneurons closely reflected the population activity and increased gradually with stimulus intensity. Interneurons receiving the first type of input may expand the input sensitivity of the network, while interneurons receiving the second type could be involved in overall normalization of the output of the CA1 network. Our results underscore the importance of knowledge of the input to an interneuron for the understanding of its inhibitory role in the network.