Previous studies have shown that hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) mRNA levels are significantly increased in rats allowed free access to exercise wheels and/or administered antidepressant medications. Enhancement of BDNF may be crucial for the clinical effect of antidepressant interventions. Since increased function of the noradrenergic and/or serotonergic systems is thought to be an important initial mechanism of antidepressant medications, we sought to test the hypothesis that noradrenergic or serotonergic function is essential for the increased BDNF transcription occurring with exercise. In addition, individual transcript variants of BDNF were examined, as evidence exists they are differentially regulated by discrete interventions, and are expressed in distinct sub-regions of the hippocampus. The neurotransmitter system-specific neurotoxins p-chloroamphetamine (serotonergic) and N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-ethyl-2-bromobenzylamine (noradrenergic) were administered to rats prior to commencing voluntary wheel-running activity. In situ hybridization experiments revealed an absence of exercise-induced full-length BDNF mRNA elevations in the hippocampi of noradrenergic-lesioned rats. In addition, the striking elevation of the exon I transcript in the dentate gyrus was removed with this noradrenergic lesion. In contrast, other transcript variants (exons II and III) were elevated in several hippocampal regions as a result of this lesion. In serotonin-lesioned rats, the significant increases in full-length BDNF, exon I and exon II mRNA levels were sustained without alteration (with the exception of exon IV in the cornus ammonis subregion 4, CA4). Overall, these results indicate that an intact noradrenergic system may be crucial for the observed ability of exercise to enhance full-length and exon I hippocampal BDNF mRNA expression. In addition, these results suggest that the promoter linked to exon I may provide a major regulatory point for BDNF mRNA expression in the dentate gyrus. Elevations of other exons, such as II and III, may require the activation of separate neurotransmitter systems and intracellular pathways.