Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) was used to separate protein samples solubilized from the nucleus accumbens and hippocampus of alcohol-naive, adult, male inbred alcohol-preferring (iP) and alcohol-nonpreferring (iNP) rats. Several protein spots were excised from the gel, destained, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. In the hippocampus, 1629 protein spots were matched to the reference pattern, and in the nucleus accumbens, 1390 protein spots were matched. Approximately 70 proteins were identified in both regions. In the hippocampus, only 8 of the 1629 matched protein spots differed in abundance between the iP and iNP rats. In the nucleus accumbens, 32 of the 1390 matched protein spots differed in abundance between the iP and iNP rats. In the hippocampus, the abundances of all 8 proteins were higher in the iNP than iP rat. In the nucleus accumbens, the abundances of 31 of 32 proteins were higher in the iNP than iP rat. In the hippocampus, only 2 of the 8 proteins that differed could be identified, whereas in the nucleus accumbens 21 of the 32 proteins that differed were identified. Higher abundances of cellular retinoic acid-binding protein 1 and a calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (both of which are involved in cellular signaling pathways) were found in both regions of the iNP than iP rat. In the nucleus accumbens, additional differences in the abundances of proteins involved in (i) metabolism (e.g., calpain, parkin, glucokinase, apolipoprotein E, sorbitol dehydrogenase), (ii) cyto-skeletal and intracellular protein transport (e.g., beta-actin), (iii) molecular chaperoning (e.g., grp 78, hsc70, hsc 60, grp75, prohibitin), (iv) cellular signaling pathways (e.g., protein kinase C-binding protein), (v) synaptic function (e.g., complexin I, gamma-enolase, syndapin IIbb), (vi) reduction of oxidative stress (thioredoxin peroxidase), and (vii) growth and differentiation (hippocampal cholinergic neurostimulating peptide) were found. The results of this study indicate that selective breeding for disparate alcohol drinking behaviors produced innate alterations in the expression of several proteins that could influence neuronal function within the nucleus accumbens and hippocampus.