Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is widely distributed in the central and peripheral nervous system. Its highly diverse biological activities are mediated via the G protein-coupled receptor that uniquely requires two accessory proteins for optimal function. CGRP receptor component protein (RCP) is a coupling protein necessary for CGRP-receptor signaling. In this study, we established the anatomical distribution of RCP in the rat central and peripheral nervous system and its relationship to CGRP immunoreactivity. RCP-immunoreactive (IR) perikarya are widely and selectively distributed in the cerebral cortex, septal nuclei, hippocampus, various hypothalamic nuclei, amygdala, nucleus colliculus, periaqueductal gray, parabrachial nuclei, locus coeruleus, cochlear nuclei, dorsal raphe nuclei, the solitary tractus nucleus and gracile nucleus, cerebellar cortex, various brainstem motor nuclei, the spinal dorsal and ventral horns. A sub-population of neurons in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and trigeminal ganglia were strongly RCP-IR. Overall, the localization of RCP-IR closely matched with that of CGRP-IR. We also determined whether RCP in DRG and dorsal horn neurons can be modulated by CGRP receptor blockade and pain-related pathological stimuli. The intrathecal injection of the antagonist CGRP(8-37) markedly increased RCP expression in the lumbar DRG and spinal dorsal horn. Carrageenan-induced plantar inflammation produced a dramatic bilateral increase in RCP expression in the dorsal horn while a partial sciatic nerve ligation reduced RCP expression in the ipsilateral superficial dorsal horn. Our data suggest that the distribution of RCP immunoreactivity is closely matched with CGRP immunoreactivity in most of central and peripheral nervous systems. The co-localization of RCP and CGRP in motoneurons and primary sensory neurons suggests that CGRP has an autocrine or paracrine effect on these neurons. Moreover, our data also suggest that RCP expression in DRG and spinal cord can be modulated during CGRP receptor blockade, inflammation or neuropathic pain and this CGRP receptor-associated protein is dynamically regulated.