The female brain is a dynamic structure, which expresses its plasticity most readily following reproductive experience (RE). In Experiment 1, we generated nulliparous (NP), primiparous (PP), and multiparous (MP) females (none, one, and two litters, respectively). Two weeks following the weaning of the first/second six-pup litters, the age-matched MP and PP and the non-pup-exposed NP animals were subjected to a 60-min restraint stress paradigm (enclosure in a Plexiglas restraint tube). The brains were removed and processed for c-fos immunoreactivity (c-fos-IR) in CA3 region of the hippocampus (HI) and in basolateral amygdala (BLA). MP and PP females had very similar numbers of c-fos-IR neurons in both HI and BLA, whereas both were lower than NPs. In a second experiment, the same groups were generated, together with primigravid (PG; first pregnancy) and multigravid (MG; second pregnancy) females, tested in late pregnancy. The animals were exposed to a 30-min trial in an open field and were killed, and the brains were again examined for c-fos-IR. The parous and gravid animals displayed less reactivity to the stress of the open field (i.e., reductions in behavioral measures of anxiety) and significantly less c-fos expression in both CA3 and BLA. The gravid animals displayed significantly less c-fos expression in CA3 and BLA compared to parous females, although neither group differed as a result of a second RE. The data suggest that reproductive (viz., hormonal) and/or maternal (viz., pup exposure) experience may inure a female and her brain to stress, rendering her less susceptible to the behavioral-or other-disruptions that stress sensitivity can produce. Together, these data suggest that the experiences of motherhood (pregnancy, pup exposure, suckling stimulation, etc.) summate to produce reductions in anxiety and stress responsiveness that start before and last long after pup exposure and care. Such reductions may be adaptive in the face of demands placed upon the parous vs. the NP female.