Intoxicating concentrations of ethanol inhibit N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-dependent long-term potentiation, an interaction thought to underlie a major component of the central nervous system actions of ethanol. Another form of synaptic potentiation involving activation of L-type dihydropyridine-sensitive voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) has been described, but very little information concerning ethanol effects on VGCC-dependent synaptic potentiation is available. Here, we assessed ethanol effects on VGCC-dependent synaptic potentiation using whole cell patch-clamp recordings of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-soxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor-mediated miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) in area CA1 of the rat hippocampus. No potentiation was observed in artificial cerebrospinal fluid containing 2 to 3 mM Ca2+, but marked potentiation of mEPSCs was consistently observed in 4 mM Ca2+ and with patch pipettes containing an ATP-regenerating system. This potentiation was insensitive to the NMDA receptor antagonist DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid, whereas it was completely blocked the L-type VGCC antagonist nifedipine. Potentiation was also blocked dose dependently by bath application of ethanol (25-75 mM), which had no effect on baseline mEPSC amplitude or frequency. The synaptic potentiation involved enhancement of both presynaptic and postsynaptic components because significant increases in both the frequency and amplitude of AMPA mEPSCs were observed. Ethanol inhibition of VGCC-dependent synaptic potentiation seemed to occur at the induction step because both the increases in mEPSC frequency and amplitude were affected. To address that question more directly, we used fluorescent imaging of synaptically evoked dendritic calcium events, which displayed a similarly marked ethanol sensitivity. Thus, ethanol modulates fast excitatory synaptic transmission by inhibiting the induction of an NMDA receptor-independent form of synaptic potentiation observed at excitatory synapses on central neurons.