Opioid drugs act primarily on the opiate receptors; they also exert their effect on other innervations resulting in non-opioidergic behavioural deficits. Similarly, opioid neurobehavioural teratogenicity is attested in numerous behaviours and neural processes which hinder the research on the mechanisms involved. Therefore, in order to be able to ascertain the mechanism we have established an animal (mouse) model for the teratogenicity induced by opioid abuse, which focused on behaviours related to specific brain area and innervation. Diacetylmorphine (heroin) and not morphine was applied because heroin exerts a unique action, distinguished from that of morphine. Pregnant mice were exposed to heroin (10 mg/kg per day) and the offspring were tested for behavioural deficits and biochemical alterations related to the septohippocampal cholinergic innervation. Some studies employing the chick embryo were concomitantly added as a control for the confounding indirect variables. Prenatal exposure to heroin in mice induced global hyperactivation both pre- and post-synaptic along the septohippocampal cholinergic innervation, including basal protein kinase C (PKC) activity accompanied by a desensitization of PKC activity in response to cholinergic agonist. Functionally, the heroin-exposed offspring displayed deficits in hippocampus-related behaviours, suggesting deficits in the net output of the septohippocampal cholinergic innervation. Grafting of cholinergic cells to the impaired hippocampus reversed both pre- and post-synaptic hyperactivity, resensitized PKC activity, and restored the associated behaviours to normality. Consistently, correlation studies point to the relative importance of PKC to the behavioural deficits. The chick model, which dealt with imprinting related to a different brain region, confirmed that the effect of heroin is direct. Taken together with studies by others on the effect of prenatal exposure to opioids on the opioidergic innervation and with what is known on the opioid regulation of the cholinergic innervation, it appears that heroin exerts its neuroteratogenicity by inducing alterations in the opioidergic innervation, which by means of its regulatory action, attenuates the functional output of the cholinergic innervation. In our model, there was hyperactivity mostly of the post-synaptic components of the cholinergic innervation. However, the net cholinergic output is decreased because PKC is desensitized to the effect of the cholinergic agonist, and this is further evidenced by the extensive deficits in the related behaviours.