Digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes and in situ hybridization of choline-O-acetyltransferase mRNA, both alone and in combination with immunohistochemical procedures for the synthetic enzyme of acetylcholine, were used to map the topography of putative cholinergic neurons in the rat central nervous system. Only the anti-sense riboprobe yielded specific labeling, which was absent in brain sections processed with sense riboprobe. Telencephalic neurons demonstrating the mRNA for choline-O-acetyltransferase and choline-O-acetyltransferase-like immunoreactivity were found in the caudate-putamen nucleus, nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercule, Islands of Calleja complex, medial septal nucleus, vertical and horizontal limbs of the diagonal band, substantia innominata, nucleus basalis, and nucleus of the ansa lenticularis, as well as occasionally in the amygdala. Neurons in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and primary olfactory structures did not demonstrate hybridization signal, even though some cells in those areas were observed to exhibit choline-O-acetyltransferase-like immunopositivity. Thalamic cells were devoid of hybrido- and immunoreactivity, with the exception of several neurons located primarily in the ventral two-thirds of the medial habenula. A few cell bodies labeled with riboprobe and co-localizing choline-O-acetyltransferase-like immunopositivity were found in the lateral hypothalamus, caudal extension of the internal capsule, and zona incerta. Neurons in the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei evinced moderate hybridization signal, whereas cells of the parabigeminal nucleus were very weakly reactive. In contrast, motor neurons of the cranial nerve nuclei demonstrated high levels of choline-O-acetyltransferase mRNA and choline-O-acetyltransferase-like immunoreactivity. Putative cholinergic somata in the ventral horns and intermediolateral cell columns of the spinal cord and around the central canal were also labeled with riboprobe. It is concluded that hybridocytochemistry with digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes confirms the existence of cholinergic neurons in most of the neural regions believed to contain them on the basis of acetylcholinesterase pharmacohistochemistry and choline-O-acetyltransferase immunocytochemistry, with the prominent exceptions of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, olfactory bulb, anterior olfactory nucleus, and caudal raphe nuclei, which apparently do not possess neurons expressing detectable levels of the mRNA for the synthetic enzyme of acetylcholine.