Basal corticosterone (B) levels increase with age in the rat, a result of decreased negative-feedback inhibition of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) activity. Postnatal handling increases CNS negative-feedback sensitivity and appears to attenuate some of the changes occurring in the HPA axis in later life. In the experiments described here, we have examined basal HPA function in young (6-8 months) and old (22 months), handled (H) and nonhandled (NH) rats in relation to changes in corticosteroid receptor binding. Among young animals, there were no group differences in basal adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) or B levels at any point in the diurnal cycle. In contrast, plasma ACTH and B levels during the PM phase were significantly higher in old NH animals in comparison to old H animals and to both groups of young animals. The H and NH groups did not differ in in vivo adrenal responsiveness to exogenous ACTH. As expected, ACTH sensitivity was greater in all groups during the PM phase and in general, old animals showed a greater response to ACTH regardless of the treatment group. There were no differences across the groups in AM plasma corticosterone-binding globulin (CBG) levels. However, during the PM phase of the cycle, CBG levels were significantly lower and the percentage of B in the free form was significantly higher in the old NH animals. As expected, levels of free B during the PM phase of the cycle were significantly higher in the old NH animals. Thus, there is a significant increase in the PM corticoid signal in the old NH animals that occurs as a function of elevated B and decreased CBG levels; these age-related changes in basal HPA activity were not seen in the old H animals. Type I (mineralocorticoid-like) receptor binding in the hippocampus did not differ as a function of handling and was significantly reduced with age in both H and NH animals. Type II (glucocorticoid) receptor binding decreased as a function of age in both H and NH animals, but was consistently higher in the H animals. There were no differences in type II receptor binding in the hypothalamus or pituitary as a function of age or handling. These data suggest that the increase in basal HPA activity occurring in aged rats is largely restricted to the dark phase of the cycle and is attenuated by postnatal handling, a treatment that increases hippocampal type II corticosteroid receptor binding.