The localization of the particulate and soluble guanylate cyclase in the rat brain was studied using cGMP-immunocytochemistry. The cGMP was fixed to tissue protein using a formaldehyde fixative, and an antibody against cGMP was used which was raised against a cGMP-formaldehyde-thyroglobulin conjugate. We used the atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) as a model compound to stimulate the particulate enzyme and sodium nitroprusside (SNP) to stimulate the soluble enzyme. Sequential immunostaining for cGMP and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) showed that the great majority of the ANF-responsive, cGMP-producing cells were astrocytes. These ANF-responsive cells were found in discrete parts of the CNS; not all astrocytes in these regions were responsive to ANF. SNP stimulated cGMP in abundantly present neuronal fibres throughout the CNS; few neuronal cell bodies showed increased cGMP production after SNP. Moreover, SNP also raised cGMP in astrocytes, however, not all astrocytes showed the response to SNP. These results suggest that cells might be present in the CNS which contain both the soluble and the particulate guanylate cyclase. It was demonstrated that in the immature cerebellum, the cGMP was raised in glial structures in response to N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), ANF, SNP, and kainic acid. The response to NMDA and kainic acid was sensitive to inhibition of the nitric oxide synthesis from L-arginine by NG-methyl-L-arginine. Surprisingly the response to ANF localized in the molecular layer and the granular layer was also sensitive to inhibition by NG-methyl-L-arginine, whereas the response to ANF in the deep nuclei was not. A small depolarization induced by 10 to 20 mmol/l K+ induced an increase in cGMP in chopped hippocampus tissue which showed a biphasic temporal characteristic. The initial, fast (30 sec), peak was shown to be localized in varicose fibres throughout the hippocampus, whereas the slower response (10 min) was localized in astrocytes. These studies demonstrate that the different enzymes which synthesize cGMP are differently localized. However, there is also a time dependency in the activation of the guanylate cyclases, which becomes apparent in different structures at different times. The possible role of cGMP as a regulator of ion homeostase is discussed.