With the principal aim of providing baseline observations for future experimental studies, the distribution of somatostatin-like and neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactivities is described in the dentate area, hippocampus, and subiculum of the domestic pig (Sus scrofa domesticus) and compared with the distribution described in other mammals. Intensely stained somatostatin-like immunoreactive nerve cell bodies were present throughout the region, with highest densities in the dentate hilus, stratum radiatum and stratum oriens of the hippocampal regio inferior, stratum oriens of the hippocampal regio superior, and in the subicular cell layer. Somatostatin-like immunoreactive terminals were represented by both stained fibers and stained puncta. Scattered somatostatin-like immunoreactive nerve fibers were seen in most areas, but regular fiber plexuses were present in the dentate molecular layer and dentate hilus, stratum moleculare of the hippocampus, and in the subicular plexiform layer. Somatostatin-like immunoreactive puncta were seen in the dentate molecular layer, stratum moleculare of the hippocampus, and in the subicular plexiform layer. Neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactive nerve cell bodies were less numerous than somatostatin-like immunoreactive ones. They were mainly seen in the dentate granule cell layer and dentate hilus, stratum radiatum and stratum oriens of the hippocampus, and in the subicular cell layer. Intensely stained neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactive fibers were numerous, and present in all areas examined. They formed fiber plexuses in the dentate molecular layer and dentate hilus, stratum moleculare of the hippocampal regio superior, and in the subicular plexiform layer. Neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactive puncta were present in the dentate molecular layer, stratum moleculare of the hippocampus, and in the subicular plexiform layer. Consistent and very characteristic variation in the distribution of somatostatin-like and neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactivity was found along the septotemporal axis of the hippocampus. The distribution of somatostatin-like and neuropeptide Y-like neurons and terminals in the domestic pig displayed striking similarities with the basic pattern of organization of these neuropeptides in other species, although more subtle species-specific characteristics were also observed in the pig.