1. Physiological responses of hippocampal pyramidal neurons in primary culture to prolonged glutamate (GLU) exposure (500 microM in all experiments) were studied with the use of patch electrodes and whole-cell current-clamp recording techniques. In some experiments, perforated patch recordings were employed with electrodes containing the pore-forming antibiotic nystatin. 2. After washout of GLU after a 10-min exposure, pyramidal neurons remained depolarized by greater than or equal to 20 mV from rest for the duration of the recording (30 min to less than 4 h). This depolarization was accompanied by a 57.8% increase in membrane conductance and was termed an extended neuronal depolarization (END). The percentage of neurons in which END was induced varied with the duration of GLU exposure, with a 4-, 6-, 8-, 10-, and 20-min GLU exposure eliciting END in 12.5, 41.7, 81.8, 100, and 100% of neurons. END induction appeared to be an all-or-none phenomenon, because END levels did not differ when compared across GLU exposure times. 3. During the END, cells retained both the ability to fire action potentials and the ability to respond to GLU, appeared viable when examined anatomically, and still excluded vital dyes. This supports the conclusion that END is not a nonspecific consequence of cell death. Rather, END is a discrete physiological process triggered by prolonged GLU exposure. The results raise questions concerning the reversibility of END induction, i.e., can neurons be "rescued" once END is induced, or will these cells inevitably go on to die? 4. END induction was dependent on a rise in intracellular free calcium ([Ca]i). END was prevented by strong buffering of [Ca]i or by substitution of external Ba2+ for Ca2+. However, substitution of Mn2+ for Ca2+ still permitted END induction. In cells recorded with the perforated-patch technique, maintaining normal [Ca]i levels, END could be induced, but less readily than under unbuffered [Ca]i conditions. 5. END could not be induced by a 10- to 20-min current-clamp depolarization to 0 mV, nor by 10-min GLU application while the membrane potential was voltage clamped at rest in a solution containing 1 mM Mg2+. In addition, END induction by GLU could be blocked by application of MK-801 (10-30 microM) but not 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione [CNQX (100-200 microM)]. 6. The dependence of both delayed neuronal cell death and END induction on GLU exposure duration were similar.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)