The histogenesis of the hamster dentate gyrus was studied with light and electron microscopy and antisera against the astrocyte-associated antigens vimentin and GFAP, in order to follow the differentiation of radial glial cells and astrocytes. The formation of the stratum granulosum is preceded by the establishment of successive dentate matrices, which are formed by cells that leave the ventricular neuroepithelium and occupy positions above the fimbria (suprafimbrial), below the pial surface (subpial), and within the dentate hilus (hilar dentate matrix). The subpial dentate matrix invades the marginal zone of that region of the cerebral wall, where the stratum granulosum will later develop. From the beginning of its existence on embryonal day 13 (E13) up to its disappearance about postnatal day 7 (P7), it is characterized by a high content of GFAP-positive cells and mitoses. This indicates early gliogenesis in the dentate anlage, long before the appearance of the stratum granulosum. Many of the bipolar GFAP-positive cells are oriented parallel to the pial surface and have focal contacts to the pial basement membrane. The establishment of the subpial dentate matrix splits the primordial radial glial scaffold of the hippocampal/dentate anlage into two bundles: 1) the suprafimbrial bundle that retains its original radial position between ventricle and pial surface; and 2) the dorsal glial bundle that traverses the ventral tip of the pyramidal cell layer of future CA3. The latter is pushed dorsolaterally, away from the pial surface, by the enlargement of the subpial dentate matrix and, later, by the suprapyramidal blade. The latter emerges around birth as small radial columns of granule cells located between the bent basal parts of the ventralmost fibers of the dorsal glial bundle and the subpial dentate matrix. From the beginning of its existence it is traversed by unipolar "secondary" radial glial fibers that appear to originate from the subpial dentate matrix. Both the supra- and the infrapyramidal blades seem to elongate by the addition of postmitotic granule cells and "secondary" radial glial cells from the subpial dentate matrix to the growing end of the primordial stratum granulosum. The hilar dentate matrix that is localized in the prospective hilar region, inside the growing stratum granulosum, also contains glial cells that seem to be incorporated into the stratum granulosum. The dentate gyrus is demarcated from the CA1 region of the hippocampus proper by GFAP-positive cells that populate the hippocampal fissure, and that also originate from the subpial dentate matrix.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)