The posterior cingulate area (CGp) of the cat consists of cortex on the exposed cingulate gyrus and in the adjacent ventral bank of the splenial sulcus. We have placed deposits of distinguishable fluorescent tracers at multiple restricted sites in CGp and have analyzed the distribution throughout the forebrain of neurons labeled by retrograde transport. Cortical projections to CGp arise (in approximately descending order of strength) from anterior cingulate cortex; prefrontal cortex and premotor areas including the frontal eye fields; visual areas including especially areas 7 and 20b; parahippocampal areas; insular cortex; somesthetic areas; and auditory areas. Corticocortical pathways are organized topographically with respect to the posterior-anterior axis in CGp. Projections from prefrontal cortex and other areas with complex (as opposed to sensory, motor, or limbic) functions are concentrated posteriorly; projections from visual and oculomotor areas are concentrated at an intermediate level; and projections from areas with somesthetic and somatomotor functions are concentrated anteriorly. Thalamic projections to CGp arise from the anterior nuclei (AD, AV, and AM), from restricted portions of the ventral complex (VAd, VAm, and VMP), from discrete sectors of the lateral complex (LD, LPs, and LPm), from the rostral crescent of intralaminar nuclei (CM, PC, and CL), and from the reuniens nucleus. Projections from AM, VAd, LD, and LPs are spatially ordered in the sense that more ventral thalamic neurons project to more anterior cortical sites. Projections from AV and AD are stronger at more posterior cortical sites but do not show other signs of topographic ordering. Projections from LPm, CM, PC, CL, and RE are diffuse. We conclude (1) that cortical afferents of CGp derive predominantly from neocortical areas including those with well established sensory and motor functions; (2) that limbic projections to CGp originate primarily in structures, including the hippocampus, which are associated with memory, as opposed to structures, including the amygdala, which are associated with emotional and instinctual behavior; and (3) that CGp contains subregions in which complex, ocular, or somatic afferents predominate.