Enzyme activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT) and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) were determined in the liver as well as several specific brain regions of young and old Fischer-344 rats of both sexes. In the liver of male rats, activities of CAT as well as Mn-SOD were lower, while activities of Cu Zn-SOD were higher in old (30-month-old) rats than in young (7-month-old) ones. Activities of total SOD as well as GSH Px were comparable for young and old male rat livers. In contrast to male rats, in female rat livers, activities of CAT were significantly higher in old (28-months-old) rats, while activities of Mn-SOD were slightly (but significantly) higher in old rat livers. In old male rats, activities of Mn-SOD were significantly higher than in young males in several specific regions of the brain (the substantia nigra (s. nigra), striatum, hippocampus) but lower in the cerebellum. In particular, SOD activities in s. nigra, striatum and hippocampus in old male rats were several fold higher than corresponding values in young male rats. Activities of Cu Zn-SOD were generally unchanged with age. Activities of CAT as well as GSH-Px (both Se-dependent and non-Se-dependent forms) were also relatively unaffected by age. In female rat brains, activities of Mn-SOD as well as those of others all remained mostly unaffected by aging, although there was a general tendency of slightly higher activities in most cerebral regions for Mn-SOD in old female rats. Thus, age-related changes of these antioxidant enzymes in the liver and brain are markedly sex dependent and some enzyme activities (such as CAT in the liver) change in an opposite direction with age. Changes of Mn-SOD in the brain were markedly region-specific in male rats. Results suggest that the significance of the changes of these antioxidant enzyme activities during aging needs to be carefully interpreted, taking into consideration the fact that changes are markedly variable depending on sex as well as the organs and brain regions examined.