Adult swine (n = 18) were studied to compare the effects on neuronal morphology of hypothermic circulatory arrest with hypothermic very-low-flow cardiopulmonary bypass. Animals were anesthetized with halothane and prepared in a standard manner for nonpulsatile cardiopulmonary bypass. Monitored variables included mean arterial pressure, arterial blood gases, the processed electroencephalogram, and subdural brain temperature. Bypass was initiated with pump flows of 100 ml.kg-1.min-1, and mean arterial pressure was kept above 50 mm Hg at all times. Animals were cooled to 18 degrees C, using a heat exchanger, and were randomly assigned to one of three groups. Group 1 animals were control animals who underwent 1 hour of hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass. Group 2 animals underwent 1 hour of circulatory arrest. Group 3 animals underwent 1 hour of very-low-flow cardiopulmonary bypass (10% of normal). At the end of the 1 hour of hypothermic bypass, very-low-flow bypass, or arrest period, animals were rewarmed to 37 degrees C with normal bypass flows, and normothermic perfusion continued for 1 additional hour. Animals were then perfusion fixed with formalin and the brains were removed for electron microscopic analysis. Electron microscopic analysis was used to determine the effects of treatment and was limited to 20 neurons of the CA1 sector of the hippocampus in each animal. Golgi bodies were identified and classified as normal, mildly affected, or severely affected. Animals subjected to either very-low-flow bypass or circulatory arrest had significantly more severely affected and significantly fewer normal Golgi bodies than control animals (p < 0.001). Animals maintained with very-low-flow bypass, however, had significantly more severely affected and fewer normal Golgi bodies than animals subjected to circulatory arrest (p < 0.001). We conclude that under the conditions of this experiment very-low-flow hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass is associated with significantly greater neuronal Golgi abnormalities than total circulatory arrest.