Chronic brain hypoperfusion (CBH) using permanent occlusion of both common carotid arteries in an aging rat model, has been shown to mimic human mild cognitive impairment (MCI), an acknowledged high risk condition that often converts to Alzheimer's disease. An aging rat model was used to determine whether hippocampal nitric oxide (NO) is abnormally expressed following CBH for two or eight weeks. At each time point, spatial memory was measured with the Morris water maze and hippocampal A beta 1-40/1-42 concentrations were obtained using sandwich ELISA. Real-time amperometric measures of NO representing the constitutive isoforms of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) and endothelial (e)NOS were also taken at each time point to ascertain whether NO levels changed as a result of CBH, and if so, whether such NO changes preceded or followed any memory or amyloid-beta pathology. We found that two weeks after CBH, NO hippocampal levels were upregulated nearly four-fold when compared to nonoccluded rats but no alteration in spatial memory of A beta products were observed at this time point. By contrast, NO concentration had declined to control levels by eight weeks but spatial memory was found significantly impaired and A beta 1-40 (but not A beta 1-42) had increased in the CBH group when compared to control rats. Since changes in shear stress are known to upregulate eNOS but generally not nNOS, these results suggest that shear stress induced by CBH hyperactivated vascular NO derived from eNOS in the first two weeks as a reaction by the capillary endothelium to maintain homeostasis of local cerebral blood flow. The return of vascular NO to basal levels after eight weeks of CBH may have triggered metabolic changes within hippocampal cells resulting in hippocampal dysfunction as reflected by spatial memory impairment and by accumulation of A beta 1-40 peptide. In conclusion, our study shows that CBH initiates spatial memory loss in aging rats thus mimicking human MCI and also increases A beta 1-40 in the hippocampus. The memory and amyloid changes are preceded by NO upregulation in the hippocampus. These preliminary findings may be important in understanding, at least in part, the molecular mechanisms that precede memory impairment during chronic brain ischemia and as such, the pre-clinical stage leading to Alzheimer's disease.