The Coolidge effect is a phenomenon in which males show renewed sexual interest in a novel female following copulation to satiety with another female. In golden hamsters, this phenomenon depends on the ability to recognize conspecifics using chemosensory cues processed through the main olfactory system. Here we tested whether olfactory targets in the hippocampal system support this natural form of recognition memory. Male hamsters received ibotenic acid lesions of the perirhinal-entorhinal cortex (PR-ENT) or hippocampus (H) and were allowed to copulate to satiety with a female conspecific, then were presented with two anesthetized females, the familiar mate and an unfamiliar female that copulated with another male. Sham-operated and H-lesioned subjects preferentially investigated the novel female, indicating intact recognition of individual identity. By contrast, PR-ENT-lesioned males failed to discriminate familiar and novel females, and this deficit could not be attributed to abnormal copulatory behavior during mating. All subjects were able to detect and discriminate between female odors when presented in isolation during a habituation-discrimination test, indicating that behavioral deficits shown by PR-ENT males were not due to anosmia or a general investigatory deficit. Thus, the perirhinal-entorhinal cortex, but not the hippocampus, is critical for the recognition of familiar conspecifics in this naturalistic situation. This study reveals an essential role for the perirhinal-entorhinal cortex, but not the hippocampus, in a natural form of recognition memory within the social behavior of hamsters. The findings show a strikingly similar pattern to the effects of selective damage to the same brain regions on performance in standard recognition memory tasks by rats and monkeys. Therefore, the present data extend our understanding of the differential role of structures of the hippocampal memory system, showing continuity across species and between formal laboratory tests and the function of memory in natural social behavior.