Seizures increase dentate granule cell proliferation in adult rats but decrease proliferation in young pups. The particular period and number of perinatal seizures required to cause newborn granule cell suppression in development are unknown. Therefore, we examined cell proliferation with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) immunohistochemistry during the peak of neurogenesis (e.g., P6 and P9) and at later postnatal ages (e.g., P13, P20, or P30) following single and multiple episodes of perinatal status epilepticus induced by kainate (KA). Because an inverse relationship exists between glucocorticosteroids (CORT) levels and granule cell proliferation, plasma CORT levels and electroencephalographic (EEG) activity were simultaneously monitored to elucidate underlying mechanisms that inhibit cell proliferation. In control animals, the number of BrdU-labeled cells increased then declined with maturation. After 1x KA or 2x KA administered on P6 and P9, the numbers of BrdU-labeled cells were not different from age-matched controls. However, rat pups with 3x KA (on P6, P9, and P13) had marked suppression of BrdU-labeled cells 48-72 h after the last seizure (43 +/- 6.5% of control). Cell proliferation was also significantly inhibited on P20 after 2x KA (to 56 +/- 6.9%) or 3x KA (to 54 +/- 7.9%) and on P30 with 3x KA (to 74.5 +/- 8.2% of age-matched controls). Cell death was not apparent as chromatin stains showed increased basophilia of only inner cells lining the granule cell layers, in the absence of eosinophilia, argyrophilia, or terminal deoxynucleotidyl dUTP nick endlabeling (TUNEL) labeling at times examined. In P13 pups with 3x KA, electron microscopy revealed an increased number of immature granule cells and putative stem cells with irregular shape, condensed cytoplasm, and electron dense nuclei, and they were also BrdU positive. The EEG showed no relationship between neurogenesis and duration of high-synchronous ictal activity. However, endocrine studies showed a correlation with BrdU number and age, sustained increases in circulating CORT levels following 1x KA on P6 (0.7 +/- 0.1 to 2.40 +/- 0.86 microg/dl), and cumulative increases that exceeded 10 microg/dl at 4-8 h after 3x KA on P13 or P20. In conclusion, a history of only one or two perinatal seizure(s) can suppress neurogenesis if a second or third seizure recurs after a critical developmental period associated with a marked surge in CORT. During the first 2 weeks of postnatal life sustained increases in postictal circulating CORT levels but not duration or intensity of ictal activity has long-term consequences on neurogenesis. The occurrence of an increased proportion of immature granule cells and putative stem cells with irregular morphology in the absence of neurodegeneration suggests that progenitors may not differentiate properly and remain in an immature state.