BACKGROUND: Maternal omega-3 fatty acid supplementation has been suggested to provide docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) for the normal brain development during gestation. DHA can be given as such (preformed) or through the omega-3 precursor alpha-linolenic acid (LNA) which is transformed into DHA by elongation and desaturation reactions. Western diet provides low amounts of LNA and DHA; therefore, supplementation with these omega-3 fatty acids has been suggested for pregnant women. However, the bioequivalence of LNA ingestion to DHA supplementation has not been established. METHODS: Recently weaning female Wistar rats were fed a diet containing a small amount of LNA and no DHA. The animals were daily supplemented 40 days before mating, during pregnancy, and until delivery with 60 mg/kg of LNA or 6 mg/kg of DHA dissolved in coconut oil. Fatty acids were given as ethyl ester derivatives. Controls received coconut oil. The fatty acid composition of blood plasma, erythrocytes, liver, visceral adipose tissue, and brain segments (frontal cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum) was analyzed. Brain segments obtained from 16- and 19-day-old fetuses and from 2- and 21-day-old rats were also analyzed for fatty acid composition. RESULTS: Supplementation with LNA and DHA induced a similar accretion of DHA in plasma, erythrocytes, liver, and brain segments of the mothers. The adipose tissue showed a higher DHA accretion after DHA-supplementation. The DHA accretion in frontal cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum obtained from the fetuses and the newborn rats was similar when the mothers were supplemented with LNA and DHA. Our results show that under our experimental conditions a similar accretion of DHA in the different tissues of the mothers and in the brain segments of fetuses and newborn rats is obtained after LNA and DHA supplementation. CONCLUSION: LNA and DHA, at the amounts given in this study, show a similar bioequivalence for DHA accretion in different tissues of the mother and in brain segments of fetuses and newborn rats.