Pathological examinations, using a panel of tau and other antibodies, were performed on the brains from 55 consecutively acquired cases of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Clinically, these comprised 31 cases of frontotemporal dementia (FTD), 10 cases of motor neurone disease inclusion dementia (MNDID), seven cases of progressive aphasia (PA), four cases of semantic dementia (SD) and three cases of progressive apraxia (PAX). Tau pathology, in the form of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and glial cell tangles, was present in six cases of FTD with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, five of these cases resulting from +16 splice-site mutation and one from +13 mutation in the tau gene. The insoluble tau proteins were comprised mostly of four-repeat (4-R) isoforms. Eight other cases of FTD, one of PA and all three cases of PAX showed tau-positive inclusions (Pick bodies) and swollen cells (Pick cells), characteristic of Pick's disease. In these cases, the insoluble tau proteins were present in most instances as three-repeat (3-R) tau isoforms, although two cases with a mixture of 3-R and 4-R isoforms were seen. One other case of FTD showed an unusual pathology characterized by massive extracellular deposition of tau protein, composed of 4-R tau isoforms, within white matter without neuronal or glial cell inclusions. However, 33 (60%) of 55 FTLD cases showed no tau pathology in the brain, except for the rare NFTs, composed of a mix of 3-R and 4-R isoforms, in some of the more elderly cases. Of these 33 cases, 13 had FTD, 10 had MNDID, six had PA and four had SD. The pathological changes present were those of a superficial cortical laminar microvacuolation with mild subpial and subcortical gliosis; the 10 MNDID cases had ubiquitin-positive inclusions in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. These 33 nontau FTLD cases, along with five Alzheimer's disease (AD) and six Huntington's disease (HD) cases with severe pathology, showed a variable loss of soluble tau proteins, broadly comparable with the extent of neuronal loss from the cortex and loss of the intracortical perikaryal marker, NeuN, but unrelated to proteins within afferent projection fibres such as neurofilament and alpha-synuclein. Levels of tau mRNA were decreased in parallel in the tau-negative FTLD cases and in the severe AD and HD cases. Hence, the loss of tau from these 33 nontau FTLD cases is just one aspect of a neurodegenerative process that destroys many components of the nerve cell machinery and does not represent a specific disordering of the cell's ability to form tau proteins or incorporate these into microtubules.