The negative impact of chronic stress at the structure of apical dendrite branches of cornu ammonis 3 (CA3) pyramidal neurons is well established. However, there is no information available on the CA3 dendritic organization related to short-lasting stress, which suffices to produce long-term habituation or sensitization of anxiety behaviors and neuroendocrine responses. Here, we tested the effects evoked by brief stress on the arrangements of CA3 pyramidal neuron dendrites, and the activity-dependent properties of the commissural-associational (C/A) excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs). Adult male rats were socially defeated followed by 3 weeks without further treatment or as comparison exposed to a regimen of a social defeat every second day for the same time period. We assessed CA3 pyramidal neurons with somatic whole-cell recording and neurobiotin application in acute hippocampal slices. The results from morphometric analysis of post hoc reconstructions demonstrated that CA3 dendrites from repeatedly stressed rats were reduced in surface area and length selectively at the apical cone (70% of control, approximately 280 microm from the soma). Brief stress, however, produced a similar decrease in apical dendritic length (77% of control, approximately 400 microm from the soma), accompanied by an increased length (167% of control) and branch complexity at the basal cone. The structural changes of the dendrites significantly influenced signal propagation by shortening the onset latency of EPSPs and increasing input resistance (r=0.45, P<0.01), of which the first was significantly changed in repeatedly stressed animals. Both brief and repeated stress long-lastingly impaired long-term potentiation of C/A synapses to a similar degree (P<0.05). These data indicate that the geometric plasticity of CA3 dendrites is dissociated from repetition of aversive experiences. A double social conflict suffices to drive a dynamic reorganization, by site-selective elimination and de novo growth of dendrite branches over the course of weeks after the actual experience.