It has previously been shown that the median raphe nucleus (MR) is one of the main sources of projections to the septum and hippocampus. 5-HT projections from this nucleus to the hippocampus are implicated in the acquisition and expression of contextual fear (background stimuli), as assessed by freezing. It has also been reported that amygdala is involved in the acquisition of conditioned fear to foreground cues such as light, used as CS. As the MR projects to the hippocampus and amygdala, the role of this raphe nucleus in fear conditioning to contextual and classical fear conditioning remains to be elucidated. The present study examined the involvement of the MR serotonergic mechanisms in the expression of two distinct types of conditioned fear responses: contextual freezing and fear conditioning to explicit cue (light) measured in a fear-potentiated startle (FPS) procedure. Animals received MR electrolytic lesions of or microinjections of 8-OH-DPAT (8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino tetralin) (1 microg/0.2 microl) into the MR, 1 or 7 days after two consecutive training sessions in which they received 10 pairings of the CS (light, 4 s)-US (foot-shocks 0.6 mA, 1s) and were tested in a contextual fear paradigm and in a FPS procedure. The startle was clearly potentiated in the presence of light-CS in animals bearing lesions of or microinjected with 8-OH-DPAT into MR at 1 or 7 days post-training. However, animals bearing MR electrolytic lesions or microinjections of 8-OH-DPAT into the MR at 1 day, but not at 7 days post-training, showed a significant decrease in time spent in freezing than control ones. Thus, the memory for contextual conditioned fear seems to be formed during a time-window shorter than 1 week. As FPS may be produced in lesioned rats unable to freeze to fear contextual stimuli, dissociable systems seem to be recruited in each condition. Thus, the production of contextual freezing and fear-potentiated startle are conveyed by distinct 5-HT-mediated circuits of the MRN.