Bombesin (BN)-like peptide receptors are known to be essential to the regulation of not only homeostasis, including feeding behavior, but also of emotional systems in mammal. Recently, two novel BN receptors, chicken BN-like peptide receptor subtype-3.5 (chBRS-3.5) and gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (chGRP-R), have been identified. Here, we report the localizations of these receptors' mRNAs in the chick brain through development using in situ hybridization. First, chBRS-3.5 mRNA signals were found in the dorsal ventricular ridge at embryonic day (ED) 9. Strong signals were observed in the hyperpallium accessorium, nidopallium and nucleus basorostralis pallii, and moderate signals were found in the hippocampus, cortex piriformis, hyperpallium intercalatum, area temporo-parieto-occipitalis, nucleus striae terminalis lateralis, nucleus olfactorius anterior and organum septi lateralis at ED16. This wide expression in the pallium persisted during posthatch periods. Abundant expressions in the hyperpallium, nidopallium, considered to be similar to the mammalian cortex, as well as in the hippocampus, indicate participation of these molecules in the processing of sensory information, motor function, learning and memory. Telencephalic areas devoid of chBRS-3.5 signals were the entopallium, arcopallium anterius, globus pallidus, nucleus intrapeduncularis, tuberculum olfactorius, nucleus septalis lateralis, hypothalamic and thalamic areas. In contrast to chBRS-3.5, chGRP-R mRNA signals were found in the pallidum at ED5 and 9. At ED16, chGRP-R mRNA signals were localized in the medial striatum and hypothalamus. GRP-R expression in the hypothalamic region was phylogenically conserved. Thus, chBRS-3.5 mRNA signals were distributed in a broader region and were more intense than chGRP-R mRNA. Taken together, chGRP-R and chBRS-3.5 mRNA occurred in similar regions of mammals that express GRP-R. BN/GRP-immunoreactive neurons and varicosities were found mainly in the pallium, especially in the hyperpallium accessorium and nidopallium, and this distribution coincided with that of chBRS-3.5 mRNA. This result suggests that the endogenous ligands for chBRS-3.5 were likely BN-like peptides produced in the pallium.