Audiogenic seizures are a model of generalized tonic-clonic brainstem-generated seizures. Repeated induction of audiogenic seizures, in audiogenic kindling (AuK) protocols, generates limbic epileptogenic activity. The present work evaluated associations between permanence of AuK-induced limbic epileptogenicity and changes in cell number/gluzinergic terminal reorganization in limbic structures in Wistar audiogenic rats (WARs). Additionally, we evaluated histological changes after only amygdala kindling (AmK) and only AuK, and longevity of permanence of AuK-induced limbic epileptogenicity, up to 160 days. WARs and Wistar non-susceptible rats were submitted to AuK (80 stimuli) followed by both 50 days without acoustic stimulation and AmK (16 stimuli), only AmK and only AuK. Cell counting and gluzinergic terminal reorganization were assessed, respectively, by using Nissl and neo-Timm histochemistries, 24 h after the last AmK stimulus. Evaluation of behavioral response to a single acoustic stimulus after AuK and up to 160 days without acoustic stimulation was done in another group. AuK-induced limbic epileptogenicity developed in parallel with a decrease in brainstem-type seizure severity during AuK. AmK was facilitated after AuK. Permanence of AuK-induced limbic epileptogenicity was associated with cell loss only in the rostral lateral nucleus of amygdala. Roughly 20 generalized limbic seizures induced by AuK were neither associated with hippocampal cell loss nor mossy fiber sprouting (MFS). AmK developed with cell loss in hippocampal and amygdala nuclei but not MFS. Main changes of gluzinergic terminals after kindling protocols were observed in amygdala, perirhinal and piriform cortices. AuK and AuK-AmK induced a similar number and type of seizures, higher than in AmK. AmK and AuK-AmK were associated with broader cell loss than AuK. Data indicate that permanent AuK-induced limbic epileptogenicity is mainly associated to gluzinergic terminal reorganization in amygdala but not in the hippocampus and with no hippocampal cell loss. Few AmK-induced seizures are associated to broader and higher cell loss than a higher number of AuK-induced seizures.