The hypothesis for a neurodevelopmental basis to the underlying physiopathological disorder leading to schizophrenia has been proposed by many investigators for more than two decades. This hypothesis is supported by -several lines of evidence. Pregnancy and delivery complications, particularly those with known or presumed impact on fetal neurologic development, result in increased risk for psychotic disorders. Other possible etiologic candidates include viral infections. Minor physical anomalies, manifesting as slight anatomical defects of the head, hair, eyes, mouth, hands and feet, as dematoglyphic fluctuating asymmetries, are due to some injury occurring during the first or second trimester of fetal life, and are more common among patients with schizophrenia and in their unaffected siblings than in the general population. But a major Issue in a such neurodevelopmental model theory is the delayed onset of the schizophrenic disorder. Although early signs and prodromal symptoms can be defined retrospectively in patients who have developed schizophrenia, they do have to be confirmed as early predictors in prospective and longitudinal studies. Abnormalities in brain development and maturation seem to begin prenatally, but may continue throughout childhood and the observed changes during these periods must have -consequences for the neuronal circuitry and connectivity. Advances in brain imaging have now led to the identification of a great number of brain abnormalities in schizophrenia. The most consistently replicated structural anomaly present in the brains of patients with chronic schizophrenia is ventricular enlargement. These findings also include medial temporal lobe structures (which include the amygdala, hippocampus, and parahippocampal gyrus), and neocortical temporal lobe regions (superior temporal gyrus). There is also some evidence for frontal lobe abnormalities, particularly prefrontal gray matter and orbitofrontal regions. Similarly, there are findings for parietal lobe abnormalities (particularly of the inferior parietal lobule which includes both supramarginal and angular gyri) and subcortical abnormalities (basal ganglia, corpus callosum, and thalamus) but more equivocal evidence for cerebellar abnormalities. However, it is possible that the brain structural abnormalities observed in schizophrenia are not only due to neurodevelopmental anomalies, but also to an alteration in cortical plasticity and maturation processes that occurs over the long course of the disease. The genetic predisposition for schizophrenia has been confirmed in many studies. It is utterly disappointing that molecular genetic approaches have so far not yielded conclusive evidence for vulnerability or protection genes in schizophrenia. Future studies will likely benefit from: 1) studying more homogeneous patient groups, 2) studying high risk populations such as biological relatives of patients with schizophrenia, 3) using longitudinal and prospective methodological design in order to confirm the predictive validity of neurodevelopmental clues found in patients with schizophrenia, 4) applying newer strategies such as composite phenotypes of developmental origin, in combination with new genetic methods.