Reelin synthesized by cortical GABAergic interneurons throughout the telencephalon is secreted into the extracellular matrix (ECM) and binds with nM affinity to integrin receptors located at dendritic spine postsynaptic densities and positively modulates Arc and other dendritic resident mRNAs translation, thereby facilitating the onset of synaptic plasticity and LTP consolidation. Accordingly, the reelin haploinsufficient heterozygous reeler mice (HRM) express a marked decrease of cortical thickness, of cortical and hippocampal dendritic spine density, and of cortical GAD67 expression. Behaviorally, HRM manifest a sensorimotor deficit, an exaggerated response to fear, and a deficit in olfactory discrimination learning. HRM and wild-type mice (WTM) were trained to retrieve to criterion palatable chocolate-flavored food pellets in an eight-arm radial maze. In 9-14 days of training HRM and WTM learned the task equally well committing only a few errors. However, HRM, when compared with WTM, show a greater cognitive impairment following the administration of dizocilpine. Also, HRM are more susceptible to the increased locomotion and stereotypic behavior elicited by dizolcipine. The enhanced dizocilpine susceptibility of HRM is not due to differences in pharmacokinetics because the levels of dizocilpine in cortices of HRM and WTM were virtually equal. We also failed to detect differences between HRM and WTM in glutamate brain content and in the rate of 13C-glucose incorporation into the glutamate brain pools. In contrast we found that the conversion index of glutamate into GABA (an indirect measurement of GABA turnover rate) is decreased in cortex, hippocampus and striatum of HRM when compared to WTM. Thus, HRM recapitulate several neurochemical and behavioral endophenotypes reminiscent of schizophrenia and these mice can be proposed as a relevant animal model for the study of pharmacological treatments aimed at alleviating the sensory-motor and cognitive dysregulation associated with schizophrenia.