Dehydration is a classic homeostatic stressor in rats that leads to a series of endocrine responses including stimulation of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. During the last decade, it has been well established that perinatal food restriction is associated with the onset of diseases in adults. Our previous demonstration of long-term alterations in HPA axis activity in both basal conditions and after a 72-hour dehydration period in 4-month-old rats exposed to a 50% maternal food restriction (FR50) in late gestation and lactation prompted us to investigate whether such perinatal undernutrition further affects HPA axis activity in mature animals. As previously described in 4-month-old rats under basal conditions, 8-month-old FR50 rats showed reduced body weight and an enhanced ratio between mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) mRNA levels in the hippocampus, as well as increased pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) mRNA levels in the adenohypophysis. In addition, numerous additional alterations appeared in mature rats. In the hypothalamus, levels of vasopressin (VP) mRNAs were increased both in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and in the supraoptic nucleus (SON). In the adenohypophysis, GR and prohormone-convertase 2 (PC2) mRNA levels were significantly increased, whereas prohormone-convertase 1 (PC1) mRNA was not affected by maternal undernutrition. Interestingly, undernourished animals exhibited high plasma levels of total and free corticosterone in spite of normal corticotropin (ACTH) levels, an indication that HPA basal activity is enhanced by maternal undernutrition in 8-month-old animals. Dehydration for 72 h induced a rise in ACTH plasma levels, but did not modify total and free corticosterone plasma levels in 8-month-old FR50 animals. In the adenopituitary, POMC mRNA levels were decreased after dehydration but PC1 mRNA levels were unaffected. The present study indicates that maternal food restriction during the perinatal period dramatically affects the activity of the HPA axis until the age of 8 months. We speculate that higher basal HPA activity and an inadequate HPA response after dehydration in mature animals may contribute to diseases such as hypertension, known to develop with aging in perinatally growth-restricted rats.