RATIONALE: Neuromedin-U (NmU) is an agonist at NMU1R and NMU2R. The brain distribution of NmU and its receptors, in particular NMU2R, suggests widespread central roles for NmU. In agreement, centrally administered NmU affects feeding behaviour, energy expenditure and pituitary output. Further central nervous system (CNS) roles for NmU warrant investigation. OBJECTIVES: To investigate the CNS role of NmU by mapping NMU1R and NMU2R mRNA and measuring the behavioural, endocrine, neurochemical and c-fos response to intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) NmU. METHODS: Binding affinity and functional potency of rat NmU was determined at human NMU1R and NMU2R. Expression of NMU1R and NMU2R mRNA in rat and human tissue was determined using semi-quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. In in-vivo studies, NmU was administered i.c.v. to male Sprague-Dawley rats, and changes in grooming, motor activity and pre-pulse inhibition (PPI) were assessed. In further studies, plasma endocrine hormones, [DOPAC + HVA]/[dopamine] and [5-HIAA]/[5-HT] ratios and levels of Fos-like immunoreactivity (FLI) were measured 20 min post-NmU (i.c.v.). RESULTS: NmU bound to NMU1R ( K(I), 0.11+/-0.02 nM) and NMU2R ( K(I), 0.21+/-0.05 nM) with equal affinity and was equally active at NMU1R (EC(50), 1.25+/-0.05 nM) and NMU2R (EC(50), 1.10+/-0.20 nM) in a functional assay. NMU2R mRNA expression was found at the highest levels in the CNS regions of both rat and human tissues. NMU1R mRNA expression was restricted to the periphery of both species with the exception of the rat amygdala. NmU caused a marked increase in grooming and motor activity but did not affect PPI. Further, NmU decreased plasma prolactin but did not affect levels of corticosterone, luteinising hormone or thyroid stimulating hormone. NmU elevated levels of 5-HT in the frontal cortex and hypothalamus, with decreased levels of its metabolites in the hippocampus and hypothalamus, but did not affect dopamine function. NmU markedly increased FLI in the nucleus accumbens, frontal cortex and central amygdala. CONCLUSIONS: These data provide further evidence for widespread roles for NmU and its receptors in the brain.