The amygdala and hippocampus are key limbic structures of the temporal lobe, and are implicated in the pathology of mood disorders. Bcl-2, an intracellular protein, has recently been identified in the primate amygdala and hippocampus, and is now recognized as an intracellular target of mood stabilizing drugs. However, there are few data on the cellular phenotypes of bcl-2-expressing cells, or their distribution in specific subregions of the amygdala and hippocampus. We used a number of histochemical markers to define specific subregions of the primate amygdala and hippocampus, and examined phenotype-specific distributions of bcl-2 immunoreactive cells within each subregion. Immature-appearing bcl-2 labeled neurons, which co-contain class III beta-tubulin immunoreactivity, are found in distinct subregions in each structure. In the amygdala, bcl-2 positive neurons with an immature morphology are densely distributed in the paralaminar nucleus and intercalated cell islands, the parvicellular basal nucleus, and the ventral periamygdaloid cortex and amygdalohippocampal area. In the hippocampus, immature-appearing bcl-2-labeled cells are confined to the polymorph layer (subgranular zone), and base of the granule cell layer in the dentate gyrus. Well-differentiated neurons also express bcl-2. In the amygdala, labeled cells with mature phenotypes are concentrated in the parvicellular basal nucleus, the accessory basal nucleus, and the periamygdaloid cortex. The medial nucleus and central extended amygdala also contain many well-differentiated bcl-2 positive cells. In the hippocampus, the dentate gyrus and Ammon's horn contain many bcl-2 immunoreactive nonpyramidal cells. These are preferentially distributed in the rostral hippocampus. CA3 and CA2 contain relatively higher concentrations of bcl-2-labeled cells than CA1 and the subiculum. Bcl-2 is thus important in intrinsic circuitry of the hippocampus, and in amygdaloid subregions modulated by the hippocampus. In addition, the extended amygdala, a key amygdaloid output, is richly endowed with bcl-2 positive cells. This distribution suggests a role for bcl-2 in circuits mediating emotional learning and memory which may be targets of mood stabilizing drugs.