Posture and gait are sensorimotor actions that involve peripheral, spinal, and supraspinal structures. To investigate brain activity during stance and locomotion, 13 healthy subjects were asked to stand, walk, run, and lie down; subsequently, they were trained to imagine standing, walking, running, and lying [imagined lying as rest condition in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)]. Separate and distinct activation/deactivation patterns were found for the three imagined conditions: (1) standing imagery was associated with activation in the thalamus, basal ganglia, and cerebellar vermis; (2) walking imagery was associated with activation in the parahippocampal and fusiform gyri (areas involved in visuospatial navigation), occipital visual areas, and in the cerebellum; (3) running imagery caused a predominantly cerebellar activation in the vermis and adjacent hemispheres (six times larger than during imagination of walking or standing), but activations in the parahippocampal and fusiform gyri were smaller than during walking. Deactivations were found for walking and running, but not for standing imagery. They were located in the vestibular (posterior insula, superior temporal gyrus, supramarginal gyrus) and somatosensory (postcentral gyrus) cortex with right-hemispheric dominance. These findings support the concept of a hierarchical organization of posture and locomotion. Automated locomotion, for example, running, is based on spinal generators whose pace is driven by the cerebellar locomotor region. Deactivation in the vestibular and somatosensory cortex prevents adverse interactions with the optimized spinal pattern and sensory signals; this confirms earlier findings of a multisensory inhibition during unhindered locomotion. During slow walking, spatial navigation, mediated by the parahippocampal cortex, becomes more important. Postural control during standing involves a low intensity cerebellar activity and sensorimotor control via the thalamus and basal ganglia.