In examining the role of Class 3 secreted semaphorins in the prenatal and postnatal development of the septohippocampal pathway, we found that embryonic (E14-E16) septal axons were repelled by the cingulate cortex and the striatum. We also found that the hippocampus exerts chemorepulsion on dorsolateral septal fibers, but not on fibers arising in the medial septum/diagonal band complex, which is the source of septohippocampal axons. These data indicate that endogenous chemorepellents prevent the growth of septal axons in nonappropriate brain areas and direct septohippocampal fibers to the target hippocampus. The embryonic septum expressed np-1 and np-2 mRNAs, and the striatum and cerebral cortex expressed sema 3A and sema 3F. Experiments with recombinant semaphorins showed that Sema 3A and 3F, but not Sema 3C or 3E, induce chemorepulsion of septal axons. Sema 3A and 3F also induce growth cone collapse of septal axons. This indicates that these factors are endogenous cues for the early guidance of septohippocampal fibers, including cholinergic and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic axons, during the embryonic stages. During postnatal stages, when target cell selection and synaptogenesis take place, np-1 and np-2 were expressed by septohippocampal neurons at all ages tested. In the target hippocampus, pyramidal and granule cells expressed sema 3E and sema 3A, whereas most interneurons expressed sema 3C, but few expressed sema 3E or 3A. Combined tracing and expression studies showed that GABAergic septohippocampal fibers terminated preferentially onto sema 3C-positive interneurons. In contrast, cholinergic septohippocampal fibers terminated onto sema 3E and sema 3A-expressing pyramidal and granule cells. The data suggest that Class 3 secreted semaphorins are involved in postnatal development. Moreover, because GABAergic and cholinergic axons terminate onto neurons expressing distinct, but overlapping, patterns of semaphorin expression, semaphorin functions may be regulated by different signaling mechanisms at postnatal stages.