The introduction of transplants consisting of cultured Schwann cells and their associated extracellular matrix (Sc/ECM) into a central nervous system (CNS) lesion cavity facilitates axonal regeneration from injured, adult mammalian neurons with subsequent reinnervation of their appropriate target (Kromer and Cornbrooks: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 82:6330-6334, 1985). In the present study, the effects of a delayed transplantation procedure on the time course of this regenerative response were evaluated. For these experiments, bilateral CNS lesions were created between the septum and hippocampus by removing the fimbria-fornix pathway. Lesion cavities received either no transplants, transplants of collagen, or Sc/ECM transplants at the time the lesion was created or 6 days later. When no transplants or transplants of collagen were used, axonal sprouts extended for very short distances into the lesion cavity. These axons were not preferentially associated with the collagen transplants nor maintained at long post-lesion survival times. In animals that received Sc/ECM transplants, the number of sprouting axons and the progression of axonal growth along the transplants was much more extensive than for the collagen transplants. Although more axons were detected in cavities that received transplants immediately after the fimbria-fornix lesion, axonal regeneration along the transplants was similar regardless of whether there was a delay in transplanting the Schwann cells. By using histochemical techniques to identify acetylcholinesterase (AChE), regenerating AChE-positive axons were first detected in the cavity at 3 days post-transplantation, were associated with the Sc/ECM transplants by 5 days, and crossed the cavity within 8 days post-transplantation. Regenerating, neurofilament-positive axons crossed the CNS-Sc/ECM transplant interfaces in association with laminin-positive, glial fibrillary acidic protein-positive cellular pathways. Upon reaching the caudal end of the Sc/ECM transplant, the cholinergic axons abandoned the transplant and oriented directly toward the adjacent hippocampus. Both the simultaneous and delayed transplantation paradigms demonstrated a similar reinnervation pattern of AChE-positive fibers in the hippocampus, but there was a more rapid penetration and more extensive arborization of fibers in animals receiving the delayed transplants. Cholinergic fibers initially invaded the dentate gyrus molecular layer and hilus between 8 and 14 days post-transplantation. By 45 days post-transplantation, AChE-positive axons were detected throughout the dentate gyrus and regio inferior, but few fibers were present in regio superior of the hippocampus.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)