PURPOSE: DIR (double inversion recovery) is a sequence with the hybrid contrast of both FLAIR and STIR sequences, produced by the application of double inversion recovery pulse. It has been suggested that DIR provides high sensitivity to lesions with low T2 contrast. The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that DIR sequence is superior to conventional sequences in the identification of mesial temporal sclerosis and other temporal lobe lesions in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-three subjects with a prediagnosis of temporal lobe epilepsy and ten healthy control subjects with no abnormality on magnetic resonance imaging studies have been studied with DIR, FLAIR and T2W sequences. Coronal images through temporal lobes and hippocampus were acquired. Qualitatively, overall sensitivity to the presence of lesions, hippocampal lesion detectability, temporal horn dilatation and artifacts were evaluated in temporal lobe epilepsy cases and quantitatively, hippocampal and white matter signal-to-noise ratio as well as hippocampus-white matter contrast-to-noise ratio were calculated in the healthy subjects. Subjective scores were graded on a scale of 3 or 4 points. RESULTS: Signal-to-noise ratio scores were higher on T2W sequence, however contrast-to-noise ratio scores were higher on DIR sequence compared to the other two sequences. Imaging findings were compatible with mesial temporal sclerosis in seven patients, tumoral mass in two, and chronic infarct in four. DIR sequence was less sensitive to hippocampal atrophy than the other two sequences because of cerebrospinal fluid artifacts. Overall sensitivity to the presence of lesions and hippocampal lesion detectability scores, although similar among three sequences, were highest with DIR sequence. However, lesion sensitivity scores were highest for lesions compatible with mesial temporal sclerosis and for solid masses and lowest for cystic lesions on DIR sequence. CONCLUSION: Despite the presence of artifacts, DIR is a sequence providing high sensitivity to mesial temporal sclerosis like lesions at hippocampus. DIR might be useful as an additional sequence when the other conventional sequences reveal a suspicious lesion with no accompanying hippocampal atrophy.