BACKGROUND: This study was undertaken to establish whether, in temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), there are relative differences between the lateral and ipsilateral medial temporal lobe in the extracellular levels of 3 of the human brain's major neuroactive amino acids. METHODS: Seven generally anesthetized patients with TLE undergoing anatomically standardized resective surgery had at operation microdialysis catheters inserted within the middle temporal gyrus (ie, lateral temporal lobe) and anterior hippocampus (ie, medial temporal lobe). Surface electrocorticography (ECoG) recordings were also obtained. Samples of 10-minute dialysate were quantified for glutamate, aspartate, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) using high-performance liquid chromatography; corresponding ECoG data were assessed for epileptiform activity. Where available, resection tissue was subjected to histopathological analysis. RESULTS: The ratio of mean "sample 3" dialysate levels of glutamate, aspartate, and GABA was approximately 20:2:1, respectively, in both the minimally epileptiform lateral (n = 7) and medial (n = 5) temporal lobe; between the 2 sets of samples, these levels were not significantly different (P > 0.05 for each amino acid studied). From the vigorously epileptiform medial temporal lobe of 2 patients, sample 3 dialysate levels of the excitatory amino acids glutamate and aspartate were found in considerably greater concentrations (between 15- and 37-fold) with correspondingly less dramatic increases of the inhibitory amino acid GABA (more than 11- and 13-fold). Laterally resected tissue (obtained in 3 cases) did not demonstrate significant cortical or subcortical abnormalities; medial resection tissue from all patients demonstrated, in varying degrees, hippocampal sclerosis. CONCLUSIONS: In the absence of significant tissue hyperexcitability, despite known differences in local cellular and/or histopathological architecture, the extracellular relationship among glutamate, aspartate, and GABA is not dissimilar in both the lateral and ipsilateral medial temporal lobe of TLE patients. Considerable disparity in dialysate levels recovered (eg, from the vigorously epileptiform medial temporal lobe) may be related to the functional (ie, hyperexcitable) status of the sampled tissue.