The preparation of hippocampal slices results in loss of input neurons to dentate granule cells, which leads to the reorganization of their axons, the mossy fibers, and alters their functional properties in long-term cultures, but its temporal aspects in the immature hippocampus are not known. In this study, we have focused on the early phase of this plastic reorganization process by analyzing granule cell function with field potential and whole cell recordings during the in vitro maturation of hippocampal slices (from 1 to 17 days in vitro, prepared from 6 to 7-day-old rats), and their morphology using extracellular biocytin labelling technique. Acute slices from postnatal 14-22-day-old rats were analyzed to detect any differences in the functional properties of granule cells in these two preparations. In field potential recordings, small synaptically-evoked responses were detected at 2 days in vitro, and their amplitude increased during the culture time. Whole cell voltage clamp recordings revealed intensive spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents, and the susceptibility to stimulus-evoked bursting increased with culture time. In acutely prepared slices, neither synaptically-evoked responses in field potential recordings nor any bursting in whole cell recordings were detected. The excitatory activity was under the inhibitory control of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor. Extracellularily applied biocytin labelled dentate granule cells, and revealed sprouting and aberrant targeting of mossy fibers in cultured slices. Our results suggest that reorganization of granule cell axons takes place during the early in vitro maturation of hippocampal slices, and contributes to their increased excitatory activity resembling that in the epileptic hippocampus. Cultured immature hippocampal slices could thus serve as an additional in vitro model to elucidate mechanisms of synaptic plasticity and cellular reactivity in response to external damage in the developing hippocampus.