Lipofuscin represents an integral part of neurons and glial cells in mammals and in submammalian species. It is a special lysosomal organelle, takes part of cellular metabolism, and is a structural expression of catabolic pathways. Species-specific differences of lipofuscin indicate metabolic differences of the relevant neurons. The authors have studied the ultrastructure of neuronal lipofuscin in the hippocampus and cerebral neocortex of dogs, horses, cows, elephants, rats, mice, apes, and humans to answer the question of species-specific differences of this organelle. Paraffin sections of formalin-fixed material were investigated by hematoxylin-eosin and PAS staining, by fluorescence microscopy for autofluorescence, with a laser scanning confocal microscope and by electron microscopy. In the animals studied and in humans the lipofuscin displayed, in addition to the general trilaminar substructure, species-specific appearances. No differences were found in the lipofuscin structure between neocortical and hippocampal neurons of the separate animal species. In contrast, in humans, neurons of the hippocampus showed a particular lipofuscin structure, not only different from the neocortical one, but also with differences between CA1 and CA3/4 sectors. Interestingly, in apes a transitional situation was found with slight differences between neocortical and hippocampal lipofuscin, especially in the rhesus monkey. This peculiarity was corroborated by the distribution of special pentilaminar linear structures in the lipofuscin pigment in all animals, only sparsely in the rhesus monkey and not in humans. The results indicate that lipofuscin ultrastructure of neocortical and hippocampal neurons is species specific and that lipofuscin in the human hippocampal neurons displays structures characteristic of man differing from the neocortical neuronal lipofuscin. The neuronal lipofuscin of apes, especially of the rhesus monkey displays structures in between humans and lower mammals. Nothing is known about the functional significance of these findings. They may indicate metabolic and/or functional characteristics of the relevant neurons.