OBJECTIVE: To compare the clinical and pathological features of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients with and without associated cerebral infarcts (CI). METHODS: The consecutive records of 57 prospectively studied demented patients fulfilling the CERAD criteria for the pathological diagnosis of AD were reviewed. Cases with cortical Lewy bodies were excluded. CI were found in 22 cases (39%) (AD+CI group): large infarcts (5), lacunes (13) and/or hippocampal sclerosis (4), and were absent in 35 cases (AD group). Microscopic infarcts, cribiform change, amyloid angiopathy, and white matter rarefaction were not considered in this classification, but were quantified. Cortical atrophy, neurofibrillary tangle and senile plaque (diffuse and neuritic) load were also measured. Pathological evaluation was independent of clinical information. Clinical and pathological data were compared between both groups. RESULTS: AD+CI cases were significantly older, more commonly female, less educated, and more often had blue collar occupations, sleep disturbances, frontal release signs, and EEG spikes than AD cases. Other differences found (acute/subacute onset, behavioral disturbances, and leukoaraiosis on CT scan) disappeared after controlling for age. The frequency of known vascular risk factors and focal motor and sensory signs did not differ between the groups, which showed remarkable clinical similarity overall. The only significant differences on pathological exam were hippocampal microinfarcts and white matter lesions, although there was a trend for lower neurodegenerative lesion load in the AD+CI group. The ischemic lesions were located in temporal lobe in 50% of AD+CI patients; these cases had a significantly lower neocortical neurodegenerative lesion load than those with CI in other sites. CONCLUSIONS: The presence of CI in AD increases significantly with age, but has scarce influence on the clinical features, and cannot be predicted from common vascular risk factors. In spite of a trend, there are no major differences in neurodegenerative lesion load between AD and AD+CI groups, except when CI are located in the temporal lobe (including hippocampus), suggesting that this location may be important in the physiopathology of mixed vascular and AD dementia.