Exposure to cigarette smoke is a risk factor for the sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), but the ability to distinguish between the neuropathological effects of pre- versus postnatal exposure is limited in the clinical setting. To test whether postnatal nicotine exposure could contribute to the increased neuronal expression of apoptotic markers that we have previously observed in SIDS infants, as well as including study of gender influences, we developed a piglet model to mimic passive smoking in the early postnatal period. Piglets were exposed to nicotine (2 mg/kg/day infused via an implanted osmotic minipump) within 48 h of birth until the age of 13-14 days, when the brain was collected for study. Four piglet groups included: control females (n=7), control males (n=7), nicotine females (n=7), and nicotine males (n=7). Apoptotic markers included immunohistochemistry for activated caspase-3, and for DNA fragmentation or terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) in seven nuclei of the brainstem caudal medulla and two subregions of the hippocampus (CA4 and dentate gyrus). Among control females compared with males, there was less active caspase-3 and less TUNEL in the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus (DMNV), and there was less TUNEL in the nucleus of the spinal trigeminal tract (NSTT). Compared with controls, nicotine-exposed male piglets had increased TUNEL staining in the cuneate nucleus (P=0.05), and increased active caspase-3 in the hypoglossal, gracile and dentate gyrus (P<0.05 for each). Nicotine-exposed females showed no change in TUNEL staining in any of the nuclei studied, but increased active caspase-3 in the hypoglossal, DMNV and NSTT (P<0.05 for each). These results show for the first time that postnatal nicotine exposure can lead to an increase in apoptotic markers in the brain. In piglets, these effects showed regional and gender-specific differences, suggesting that passive, postnatal nicotine exposure may be responsible for some neuropathological changes observed in infants dying from SIDS.