The effects of cholinergic basal forebrain lesions on the activity of the glutamatergic and GABAergic systems were investigated in the rat frontal cortex and hippocampus. Bilateral quisqualic acid injections in the nucleus basalis magnocellularis (NBM) at the origin of the main cholinergic innervation to the neocortex induced a cholinergic deficit in the cerebral cortex 15 days later, as shown by the marked selective decrease in cortical choline acetyltransferase (CAT) activity observed. Concurrent alterations in the kinetic parameters of high affinity glutamate uptake consisting mainly of a decrease in the Vmax were observed in the cerebral cortex. These changes presumably reflect a decreased glutamatergic transmission and provide support for the hypothesis that cortical glutamatergic neurons may undergo the influence of cholinergic projections from the NBM. Surprisingly, similar alterations in the glutamate uptake process were found to occur at hippocampal level in the absence of any significant change in the hippocampal cholinergic activity. These data indicate that the NBM may contribute to regulating hippocampal glutamatergic function without interfering with the hippocampal cholinergic innervation that mainly originates in the medial septal area-diagonal band (MSA-DB) complex. No change in parameters of GABAergic activity, namely the glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) activity and high affinity GABA uptake, were observed in any of the structures examined. In a second series of experiments involving bilateral intraventricular injections of AF64A, marked survival time-dependent decreases in CAT and high affinity choline uptake activities but no significant change in the high affinity glutamate uptake rate were observed in the hippocampus. No significant change in either parameters of cholinergic activity or in the glutamate uptake was concurrently observed in the cerebral cortex. The GABAergic activity was again unaffected whatever the survival time and the structure considered. Taken as a whole, these data suggest that basal forebrain projections originating in the NBM may play a major role in regulating glutamatergic but not GABAergic function in both the cerebral cortex and the hippocampus; whereas the glutamatergic and GABAergic activities in these two structures may not be primarily under the influence of the cholinergic projections from the MSA-DB complex.