Small immunoreactive cholinergic neurons were detected in the main and accessory olfactory bulbs of the rat with choline acetyltransferase immunocytochemistry. Such cells were also found in additional forebrain regions that received direct efferent innervation from the main olfactory bulb, such as the anterior olfactory nucleus, two subdivisions of the olfactory amygdala (nucleus of the lateral olfactory tract and anterior cortical nucleus), and the cortical-amygdaloid transition zone. Cholinergic neurons located in these olfactory-related regions were similar to each other morphologically and to those previously described by other investigators in the cerebral cortex, the hippocampus, and the basolateral amygdala. Somal measurements indicated that choline acetyltransferase-positive cells in olfactory-related regions were all essentially the same size, measuring 13-14 by 8-9 microns in major and minor diameters, respectively. In addition, these small cells were commonly bipolar in form with thin, smooth dendrites, and such characteristics have generally been associated with intrinsic, local circuit neurons in the forebrain. Depending on their location, however, these small cholinergic neurons differed from each other with regard to their frequency and dendritic orientation within planar sections. Choline acetyltransferase-immunoreactive cells in most cortical regions were relatively numerous and usually exhibited long, planar dendrites oriented perpendicularly to the pial surface. In contrast, dendrites of cholinergic neurons found in "cortical-like" regions (e.g. olfactory bulbs or nucleus of the lateral olfactory tract) were relatively sparse in number and appeared to be distinctly non-planar and randomly oriented. Despite these differences, the small choline acetyltransferase-positive cells had many features in common, including their distribution within forebrain regions that contained substantial terminal networks of choline acetyltransferase-positive axons thought to be derived primarily from the basal forebrain complex. In the rat, at least, the presence of small cholinergic interneurons within forebrain regions innervated by the large cholinergic projection neurons of the basal forebrain seems to be developing as a general principle of telencephalic organization. However, differences in both the size and the distribution of the terminal fields derived from each source imply a functional diversity between the intrinsic and extrinsic cholinergic systems of the forebrain.