In urethane-anesthetized rats, stimulation of the contralateral hippocampal CA1 region resulted in activation of the homotopic CA1 region. Current-source-density analysis revealed that both basal and apical dendrites were activated. However, alveolar and stratum oriens stimulation in CA1 gave about equal peak excitation of the basal and apical dendrites while CA1 stratum radiatum/moleculare and CA3c stimulation gave stronger apical than basal dendritic excitation. In chronically implanted and freely moving rats, tetanic patterned stimulation of the contralateral CA1, irrespective of depth, resulted in a robust long-term potentiation of the ipsilateral CA1 basal dendritic synapse. The population basal dendritic excitatory postsynaptic potential was initially potentiated to greater than 200% of the baseline and decayed with a 3 h time constant; it lasted at least two days. Patterned stimulation of the commissural inputs at 2 x threshold stimulus intensity seldom potentiated the apical dendritic synapse in CA1; rather, long-term depression was sometimes observed. After tetanic stimulations at 3 x threshold, a small potentiation of the apical dendritic excitation was seen in about half of the experiments. The average apical dendritic potentiation peaked at about 25% and persisted to at least one day. This study provides original evidence that the properties of long-term potentiation are different at the commissural basal dendritic and apical dendritic synapses in CA1 of the behaving rat. Basal dendritic potentiation is low-threshold, high-amplitude and decayed rapidly in the first 3 h. Apical dendritic potentiation is high-threshold, low-amplitude and not rapidly decaying. A long-lasting enhancement of synaptic transmission has been postulated as a physiological correlate of memory. This paper reports properties of this synaptic enhancement for two different types of synapses on the same cells in the behaving animal. The basal dendritic synapse on hippocampal pyramidal cells readily increased their efficacy, up to at least two days, after a brief, patterned stimulation. In the same preparation, it was difficult to obtain a long-lasting increase in the apical dendritic excitation, in contrast to studies on isolated hippocampal slices in vitro.