A distinctive feature of galanin expression is that it is extensively increased by neuronal injury, estrogens, Alzheimer's disease and during development. Since stroke is amongst the clinically most important causes of neuronal injury we studied the tissue concentrations of galanin in a rat stroke model and the possibility of modulating this effect with estrogen. Transient focal middle cerebral artery ischemia was induced in rats that 2 weeks earlier underwent ovariectomy and received 1.5mg 17beta-estradiol slow-release or placebo pellets. The concentrations of galanin and neuropeptide Y were measured after observation periods of 3, 7 and 14 days in extracts of punch biopsies from both the lesioned and the contra lateral control hemisphere. The galanin levels were not changed in any of the brain regions studied except in the hippocampus where they were lower in the ischemic hemisphere in both the estrogen- and placebo-treated animals compared to the corresponding contra lateral intact hemisphere (p=0.015). Estrogen treatment up-regulated galanin concentrations in both the ventral and dorsal hippocampus (p=0.003). The effects on the galanin concentrations were similar after all observation periods: 3, 7 and 14 days (p=0.144). No significant changes were observed in the concentration of neuropeptide Y in response to the lesions. The ischemic lesions were markedly larger in the estrogen-treated animals observed after 3 days compared to the corresponding control group. In the estrogen group the lesion was largest at bregma and the slice 2mm anterior to the bregma, 82% and 435% larger than in the control group (p<0.001). A similar, but much less pronounced (not statistically significant) difference was seen in the groups observed after 7 and 14 days. Earlier studies of lesions in the peripheral and central nervous systems have generally shown an up-regulation of galanin markers in response to but at a distance from the injury. Our results indicate that galanin is not involved in the response of the ischemic penumbra itself to stroke, whereas it may participate in the reactions of the neural stem-cell rich hippocampus to stroke.