Neurochemical and behavioral studies in the rat have provided evidence for the view that galanin impairs learning via an inhibitory modulation of cholinergic neurons in the septohippocampal projection, believed to be important for learning and memory. To test this hypothesis, galanin was microinjected via a unilateral chronic cannula located in MS/dBB of rats. Infusion of galanin in the MS/dBB, which contains a high number of 125I-galanin binding sites, did not impair spatial acquisition or memory. On the contrary, spatial acquisition tended to be facilitated by 1 and 3 nmoles of galanin, while the 0.3 nmol dose had no effect. Intraseptal injections of scopolamine (10 microg/rat), a non-specific muscarinic antagonist, also failed to alter learning performance. In contrast, co-injections of galanin (3 nmol) and scopolamine (10 microg) resulted in a marked impairment of spatial acquisition. The effect of intraseptal galanin on basal acetylcholine release in the ventral hippocampus was examined by in vivo microdialysis and high-performance liquid chromatography. Both galanin (3 nmol/rat) and scopolamine (10 microg/rat) infused into the MS/dBB increased basal acetylcholine release in the ventral hippocampus. The combined injections of galanin and scopolamine resulted in an excessive increase in acetylcholine release. These results indicate, that galanin activates septohippocampal cholinergic neurons, suggesting that septal galanin may have a facilitatory role in spatial learning. Moreover, the level of muscarinic activity within the septal area appears to be critical for the effects of galanin on cognitive functions, since the combination of galanin and scopolamine produced a marked impairment in spatial learning, despite a marked increase in hippocampal acetylcholine release. In summary, a limited range of cholinergic muscarinic transmission may contribute to optimal hippocampal function, a finding that has important implications for therapeutic approaches in the treatment of disorders of memory function.