We have examined the effects of prenatal protein malnutrition on interneuronally mediated inhibition and facilitation in the dentate gyrus of the rat using the paired-pulse technique. Field potentials were recorded in the dentate gyrus in response to paired stimuli delivered to the perforant path. The paired-pulse index (PPI) was used as a measure of the net short-term facilitation or interneuronally mediated inhibition effective at the time of the paired-pulse test and was computed by dividing the amplitude of the second population spike (p2) by the amplitude of the first population spike (p1). PPIs were classified according to p1 in order to compare PPIs between behavioral states and dietary treatments since population spike amplitudes in the dentate gyrus vary in relation to behavioral state. Testing was performed during 4 behavioral states: slow-wave sleep (SWS), paradoxical sleep (REM), immobile waking (IW) and exploratory locomotion (AW) using interpulse intervals (IPI) from 20 to 400 ms. The magnitude and duration of interneuronally mediated inhibition was significantly increased in prenatal protein malnourished animals when compared with controls. Paired-pulse tests performed using an IPI of 20 ms under the high p1 (p1 greater than median) condition showed significantly smaller PPIs in prenatal protein malnourished rats regardless of behavioral state. For IPIs greater than 20 ms PPIs were consistently smaller in prenatal protein malnourished rats during SWS and IW. These data indicate that both the magnitude and duration of interneuronally mediated inhibition are increased in prenatally malnourished rats. No consistent diet-related differences were found during AW and REM using IPIs greater than 20 ms because interneuronally mediated inhibition was relatively suppressed during these behavioral states for both dietary groups. There was no consistent behavioral state modulation of paired-pulse facilitation (IPI = 40 to 80 ms) or late inhibition (IPI = 400 ms) in either diet group. In addition, a new relation between PPI and IPI was found under the low p1 (p1 greater than median) condition. During AW the PPIs observed using IPIs of 40 and 50 ms were smaller than those observed using IPIs of 30 and 60 ms. This depression interrupts what is generally considered the "facilitatory" phase of paired-pulse response and may indicate an interaction between perforant path stimulation and hippocampal theta rhythm which is masked when p1 amplitude is high.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)