PURPOSE: Adenosine is a major negative neuromodulator of synaptic activity in the central nervous system and can exert anticonvulsant and neuroprotective effects in many experimental models of epilepsy. Extracellular adenosine can be formed by a membrane-anchored enzyme ecto-5'-nucleotidase. The purposes of this study were to characterize the role of adenosine receptors in modulating status epilepticus (SE) induced by pilocarpine and evaluate its neuroprotective action. Ecto-5'-nucleotidase activity was studied during the different phases of pilocarpine-induced epilepsy in rats. METHODS: Adult rats were pretreated with different adenosinergic agents to evaluate the latency and incidence of SE induced by pilocarpine in rats. The neuroprotective effect also was evaluated. RESULTS: A proconvulsant effect was observed with DPCPX and DMPX that reduced the latency of SE in almost all rats. Pretreatment with the MRS 1220 did not alter the incidence of SE but reduced the latency to develop SE. An anticonvulsant and neuroprotective effect was detected with R-PIA. Rats pretreated with R-PIA had a decreased number of apoptotic cells in the hippocampus, whereas pretreatment with DPCPX did not modify the hippocampal damage. An intensification of neuronal death was observed in the dentate gyrus and CA3 when rats were pretreated with DMPX. MRS-1220 did not modify the number of apoptotic cells in the hippocampus. An increase in the ecto-5 -nucleotidase staining was detected in the hippocampus during silent and chronic phases. CONCLUSIONS: The present data show that adenosine released during pilocarpine-induced SE via A1-receptor stimulation can exhibit neuroprotective and anticonvulsant roles. Similar effects could also be inferred with A2a and A3 adenosinergic agents, but further experiments are necessary to confirm their roles. Ecto-5 -nucleotidase activity during silent and chronic phases might have a role in blocking spontaneous seizures by production of inhibitory neuromodulator adenosine, besides taking part in the mechanism that controls sprouting.