Neurotrophins are a family of secreted neuronal survival and plasticity factors comprising NGF, BDNF, neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), and NT-4. Whereas synaptic secretion of BDNF has been described, the routes of intracellular targeting and secretion of NGF, NT-3, and NT-4 in neurons are poorly understood. To allow for a direct comparison of intracellular targeting and release properties, all four mammalian neurotrophins were expressed as green fluorescent protein fusion proteins in cultured rat hippocampal neurons. We show that BDNF and NT-3 are targeted more efficiently to dendritic secretory granules of the regulated pathway of secretion (BDNF, in 98% of cells; NT-3, 85%) than NGF (46%) and NT-4 (23%). For all NTs, the remaining cells showed targeting to the constitutive secretory pathway. Fusing the BDNF pre-pro sequence to NT-4 directed NT-4 more efficiently to the regulated pathway of secretion. All neurotrophins, once directed to the regulated secretion pathway, were detected near synapsin I-positive presynaptic terminals and colocalized with PSD-95-DsRed (postsynaptic density-95-Discosoma red), suggesting postsynaptic targeting of the neurotrophins to glutamatergic synapses. Depolarization-induced release of all neurotrophins from synaptic secretory granules was slow (delay in onset, 10-30 s; tau = 120-307 s) compared with transmitter release kinetics monitored with FM4-64 [N-(3-triethylammoniumpropyl)-4-(6-(4-diethylamino)phenyl)hexatrienyl)pyridinium dibromide] destaining (onset, <5 s; tau = 13 +/- 2 s). Among the neurotrophins, NT-4 secretion was most rapid but still proceeded 10 times more slowly than transmitter secretion. Preincubation of neurons with monensin (neutralizing intragranular pH, thus solubilizing the peptide core) increased the speed of secretion of BDNF, NGF, and NT-3 to the value of NT-4. These data suggest that peptide core dissolution in secretory granules is the critical determinant of the speed of synaptic secretion of all mammalian NTs and that the speed of release is not compatible with fast transmitter-like actions of neurotrophins.