The present report summarizes studies combining an in vivo and in vitro approach, where asphyxia is induced in vivo at delivery time of Wistar rats, and the long term effects on hippocampus neurocircuitry are investigated in vitro with organotypic cultures plated at postnatal day seven. The cultures preserved hippocampus layering and regional subdivisions shown in vivo, and only few dying cells were observed when assayed with a viability test at day in vitro 27. When properly fixed, cultures from asphyxia-exposed animals showed a decreased amount of microtubule-associated protein-2 immunocytochemically positive cells (approximately 30%), as compared with that from controls. The decrease in microtubule-associated protein-2 immunocytochemistry was particularly prominent in Ammon's horn 1 and dentate gyrus regions (approximately 40%). 5-Bromo-2'deoxyuridine labeling revealed a two-fold increase in cellular proliferation in cultures from asphyxia-exposed, compared with that from control animals. Furthermore, confocal microscopy and quantification using the optical disector technique demonstrated that in cultures from asphyxia-exposed animals approximately 30% of 5-bromo-2'deoxyuridine-positive cells were also positive to microtubule-associated protein-2, a marker for neuronal phenotype. That proportion was approximately 20% in cultures from control animals. Glial fibrillary acidic protein-immunocytochemistry and Fast Red nuclear staining revealed that the core of the hippocampus culture was surrounded by a well-developed network of glial fibrillary acidic protein-positive cells and glial fibrillary acidic protein-processes providing an apparent protective shield around the hippocampus. That shield was less developed in cultures from asphyxia-exposed animals. The increased mitotic activity observed in this study suggests a compensatory mechanism for the long-term impairment induced by perinatal asphyxia, although it is not clear yet if that mechanism leads to neurogenesis, astrogliogenesis, or to further apoptosis.