Stereology is a group of mathematical and statistical methods that allows the extrapolation of three-dimensional structural information from two-dimensional sections (or slices). This allows researchers to derive important quantitative structural information, such as the volume, surface area or numbers of particular particles (e.g. cells) within defined regional boundaries. The need for such quantitative information in biology is of particular importance when evaluating the influence of various experimental treatments on specific organs, tissues and cells in the body. Knowledge of such changes has given important insights into the neural substrates that may be responsible for the functional and behavioral consequences of a disparate range of experimental treatments. Here, we describe some of these methods as applied to quantifying the total numbers of cells in defined regions of the hippocampal formation. The methods used for this evaluation were, first, the Cavalieri principle, which was used to determine the volumes of the various subdivisions of the rat hippocampus, and, second, the 'physical disector' method, which was used to estimate the numerical density of neurons within each subdivision. Once these values were derived, it was but a simple task to multiply them together to obtain estimates for the total numbers of cells in the given hippocampal region. We found that 16-and 30-day-old normal male rats had 176 800 and 152 700 pyramidal cells in the CA1 region, respectively. This decrease in the neuronal number was statistically significant. However, in the CA2 + CA3 region, there were approximately 169 300 and 149 600 pyramidal cells in 16- and 30-day-old normal male rats, respectively, which was not significantly different. In the dentate gyrus, there were approximately 36 700 neurons in the hilus region and 483 000 granule cells in the granule cell layer, irrespective of the age of the rats. There were no significant differences between these estimates of hilus neurons and granule cells.