Classical eyeblink conditioning has been known to depend critically on the cerebellum. Apparently consistent with this, glutamate receptor subunit delta2 null mutant mice, which have serious morphological and functional deficiencies in the cerebellar cortex, are severely impaired in delay paradigm. However, these mutant mice successfully learn in trace paradigm, even in '0-trace paradigm,' in which the unconditioned stimulus starts just after the conditioned stimulus terminates. Our previous studies revealed that the hippocampus and the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors play crucial roles in 0-trace paradigm in glutamate receptor subunit delta2 null mutant mice unlike in wild-type mice, suggesting a large contribution of the forebrain to 0-trace conditioning in this type of mutant mice. In the present study, we investigated the role of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors in 0-trace eyeblink conditioning in glutamate receptor subunit delta2 null mutant mice. Mice were injected intraperitoneally with the noncompetitive N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor antagonist (+)MK-801 (0.1mg/kg) or saline, and conditioned with 350-ms tone conditioned stimulus followed by 100-ms periorbital shock unconditioned stimulus. Glutamate receptor subunit delta2 null mutant mice that received (+)MK-801 injection exhibited a severe impairment in acquisition of the conditioned response, compared with the saline-injected glutamate receptor subunit delta2 null mutant mice. In contrast, wild-type mice were not impaired in acquisition of 0-trace conditioned response by (+)MK-801 injection. After the injection solution was changed from (+)MK-801 to saline, glutamate receptor subunit delta2 null mutant mice showed a rapid and partial recovery of performance of the conditioned response. On the other hand, when the injection solution was changed from saline to (+)MK-801, glutamate receptor subunit delta2 null mutant mice showed a marked impairment in expression of the pre-acquired conditioned response, whereas impairment of the expression was small in wild-type mice. Injection of (+)MK-801 had no significant effects on spontaneous eyeblink frequency or startle eyeblink frequency to the tone conditioned stimulus in either glutamate receptor subunit delta2 null mutant mice or wild-type mice. These results suggest that N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors play critical roles both in acquisition and expression of the conditioned response in 0-trace eyeblink conditioning in glutamate receptor subunit delta2 null mutant mice.