Vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) adaptation and brainstem Fos expression as a result of short radius cross-coupling stimuli were investigated to find neural correlates of the inherent Coriolis force asymmetry from an artificial gravity (AG) environment. Head-fixed gerbils (Meriones unguiculatus, N=79) were exposed, in the dark, to 60--90 minutes of cross-coupled rotations, combinations of pitch (or roll) and yaw rotation, while binocular horizontal, vertical, and torsional eye position were determined using infrared video-oculography. Centripetal acceleration in combination with angular cross-coupling was also studied. Simultaneous sinusoidal rotations in two planes (yaw with roll or pitch) provided a net symmetrical stimulus for the right and left labyrinths. In contrast, a constant velocity yaw rotation during sinusoidal roll or pitch provided the asymmetric stimulus model for AG. We found orthogonally oriented half-cycle VOR gain changes. The results depended on the direction of horizontal rotation during asymmetrical cross-coupling, and other aspects of the stimulus, including the phase relationship between the two rotational inputs, the symmetry of the stimulus, and training. Fos expression also revealed laterality differences in the prepositus and inferior olivary C subnucleus. In contrast the inferior olivary beta and ventrolateral outgrowth were labeled bilaterally. Additional cross-coupling dependent labeling was found in the flocculus, hippocampus, and several cortical regions, including the perirhinal and temporal association cortices. Analyses showed significant differences across the brain regions for several factors (symmetry, rotation velocity and direction, the presence of centripetal acceleration or a visual surround, and training). Finally, animals compensating from a unilateral surgical labyrinthectomy who received multiple cross-coupling training sessions had improved half-cycle VOR gain in the ipsilateral eye with head rotation toward the intact side. We hypothesize that cross-coupling vestibular training can benefit aspects of motor recovery or performance.