A small dose of tetanus toxin (2-5 ng; 10 mouse LD50) injected into the rat hippocampus produces a chronic epileptic syndrome in which epileptic discharges recur intermittently for 6-8 weeks. Hippocampal slices prepared during this period and maintained in vitro generate both evoked and spontaneous epileptic discharges. The present study used slices prepared 8-18 days after injection of tetanus toxin or vehicle solution into both hippocampi to test whether or not synaptic inhibition was selectively impaired in this experimental epilepsy. Intracellular recordings were made from CA3 pyramidal layer neurones within the tetanus toxin focus, which was identified by field potential recordings of synchronous bursts evoked by afferent stimulation. The intrinsic properties of these neurones did not differ from comparable cells in control-injected rats. All cells generated excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) following stimulation of stratum radiatum in CA3. In control slices EPSPs were followed by a 'fast' inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP), peaking at 25-30 ms, with a mean amplitude (+/- SEM) of -6.7 mV (+/- 0.66). In the epileptic slices these were absent, and the EPSP prolonged so that the potential at 30 ms was a depolarisation of +6.6 mV (+/- 2.75). The slow IPSP at 120 ms dropped to -0.27 mV (+/- 0.18) from -3.97 mV (+/- 1.43) (11 cells in each group). The loss of IPSPs cannot be attributed to a shift in reversal potentials in the toxin-injected group because no IPSPs were unmasked by current injection (n = 11). IPSPs also occurred spontaneously in the neurones in control slices, with a mean amplitude of -1.30 mV. Their frequency decreased by a factor of 13 in cells from the chronic focus induced by tetanus toxin (P less than 0.0001, analysis of variance), but their amplitude did not change significantly (mean of -1.22 mV). Spontaneous EPSPs were significantly more frequent and slightly smaller in the toxin-injected group (mean amplitudes 1.35 and 1.13 mV respectively). Together these studies support the hypothesis that the chronically recurring seizures induced by low doses of tetanus toxin can be attributed to a substantial, persistent and selective reduction of inhibitory neurotransmission in the hippocampus.