Recent studies suggest that caspase-3-mediated mechanisms are essential for neuronal plasticity. N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Asp(OMe)-Glu(OMe)-Val- Asp(OMe)-fluoromethyl ketone (z-DEVD-fmk), a caspase inhibitor with predominant specificity toward caspase-3, has been shown to block long-term potentiation in hippocampal slices. Intrahippocampal infusion of a caspase-3 inhibitor to rats has been shown to significantly impair spatial memory in the water maze. The present work was designed to study whether i.c.v. administration of a caspase-3 inhibitor z-DEVD-fmk impairs learning in other tasks related to specific forms of memory in rats. The rats received bilateral injections of z-DEVD-fmk or N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Phe-Ala-fluoromethyl ketone (z-FA-fmk) ("control" peptide) at a dose of 3 nmol. Administration of z-DEVD-fmk significantly decreased the number of avoidance reactions in some blocks of trials in the active avoidance (shuttle box) learning, while z-FA-fmk had no effect as compared with intact rats. However, only a slight effect of the caspase inhibitor across the session was found. z-DEVD-fmk impaired development of some essential components of the two-way active avoidance performance, such as escape reaction, conditioned fear reaction, and inter-trial crossings. Measurement of caspase-3 activity in rat brain regions involved in active avoidance learning revealed most expressed z-DEVD-fmk-related inhibition of the enzyme activity (about 30%) in the fronto-parietal cortex. A similar effect was close to significant in the hippocampus, but not in the other cerebral structures studied. In primary cultures of cerebellar neurons z-DEVD-fmk (2-50 microM) inhibited caspase-3 activity by 60-87%. We suggest that moderate inhibition of caspase-3 resulting from the central administration of z-DEVD-fmk to rats may impair active avoidance learning. Taking into account previous data on the involvement of neuronal caspase-3 in neuroplasticity phenomena we assume that the enzyme may be important for selected forms of learning.