BACKGROUND: We studied the surgical outcome, and the complications in a group of 100 consecutive adult patients with medically refractory epilepsy arising from the temporo-mesial structures. METHODS: Hundred patients were treated surgically between 1994 and 2003 for drug-resistant epilepsy involving the temporo-mesial structures. All of them underwent a comprehensive noninvasive presurgical evaluation. Fourty-eight of them underwent depth electrodes recordings (according to the Talairach's StereoElectroEncephaloGraphic (SEEG) methodology) because the noninvasive investigations were not congruent enough to identify the epileptic zone. The patients presenting with any space-occupying lesion, or with a cavernoma, or with a strictly lateral neocortical epileptic focus, were excluded. The MRI-examination was abnormal in 87 cases, displaying a hippocampal atrophy in 69 cases. The extent of temporal resection was planned according to the results of the presurgical investigation in each particular patient. Consequently, this "tailored" resection varied from selective amygdalo-hippocampectomy (6 cases), to anterior temporal lobectomy (76 cases), or to total temporal lobectomy (18 cases). FINDINGS: The mean post-operative follow-up period was 53 months. 85 patients were found to be in Engel's class I post-operatively (free of disabling seizures), among them 74 were in class Ia (totally seizure free). Nine patients were in Engel's class II and six were in Engel's class III or IV (failures). There was no surgical mortality. Three patients had a postoperative hematoma; two patients required a shunt insertion; in three patients meningitis occurred; and two patients had postoperative ischaemia of the anterior choroidal artery territory, which resulted in a mild permanent hemiparesis. Neuropsychological complications are not addressed in detail in this article. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that "tailored" resective surgery for temporo-mesial epilepsy can be performed with a low rate of morbidity, and is highly efficacious. The use of invasive presurgical investigation (SEEG) may explain this high rate of success.