We have previously isolated a 22 kDa protein from a rat brain which was found to be involved in activating phospholipsae D (PLD), and identified the protein as hippocalcin through sequence analysis. Nevertheless, the function of hippocalcin for PLD activation still remains to be resolved. Here, we proposed that hippocalcin was involved in extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-mediated PLD2 expression. To elucidate a role of hippocalcin, we made hippocalcin transfected NIH3T3 cells and showed that the expression of PLD2 and basal PLD activity were increased in hippocalcin transfected cells. We performed PLD assay with dominant negative PLD2 (DN-PLD2) and hippocalcin co-transfected cells. DN-PLD2 suppressed increase of basal PLD activity in hippocalcin transfected cells, suggesting that increased basal PLD activity is due to PLD2 over-expression. Hippocalcin is a Ca2+-binding protein, which is expressed mainly in the hippocampus. Since it is known that lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) increases intracellular Ca2+, we investigated the possible role of hippocalcin in the LPA-induced elevation of intracellular Ca2+. When the intracellular Ca2+ level was increased by LPA, hippocalcin was translocated to the membrane after LPA treatment in hippocalcin transfected cells. In addition, treatment with LPA in hippocalcin transfected cells markedly potentiated PLD2 expression and showed morphological changes of cell shape suggesting that increased PLD2 expression acts as one of the major factors to cause change of cell shape by making altered membrane lipid composition. Hippocalcin-induced PLD2 expression potentiated by LPA in hippocalcin transfected cells was inhibited by a PI-PLC inhibitor, U73122 and a chelator of intracellular Ca2+, BAPTA-AM suggesting that activation of hippocalcin caused by increased intracellular Ca2+ is important to induce over-expression of PLD2. However, downregulation of PKC and treatment of a chelator of extracellular Ca2+, EGTA had little or no effect on the inhibition of hippocalcin-induced PLD2 expression potentiated by LPA in the hippocalcin transfected cells. Interestingly, when we over-express hippocalcin, ERK was activated, and treatment with LPA in hippocalcin transfected cells significantly potentiated ERK activation. Specific inhibition of ERK dramatically abolished hippocalcin-induced PLD2 expression. Taken together, these results suggest for the first time that hippocalcin can induce PLD2 expression and LPA potentiates hippocalcin-induced PLD2 expression, which is mediated by ERK activation.