The electrophysiological and pharmacological properties of CA1 hippocampal pyramidal neurons were studied in slices from young (three to four months) and aged (25-32 months) Sprague-Dawley rats having previously performed two behavioral tasks. About 20% of the aged rats were impaired in either the spontaneous alternation task or the water maze task. Electrophysiological parameters were measured and compared in young and aged animals using intracellular recordings. No age-related differences were observed in membrane potential, input resistance, amplitude of action potentials or amplitude of calcium spikes. The amplitude and duration of individual afterhyperpolarizations following a single spike were unchanged. In contrast, the neuronal excitability was significantly decreased and the spike duration significantly enhanced in aged rats as compared to young rats. The comparison of afterhyperpolarizations (which follow a burst of spikes) between young and aged rats was more complex. An increase in the amplitude and duration of afterhyperpolarizations generally occurred in aged animals. However, this increase was not consistent among animals and was dependent on the holding potential of the neuron and on the number of action potentials used to trigger the afterhyperpolarization. The depolarizing effect of bath-applied carbachol, as well as the associated increase in membrane resistance were reduced in neurons from aged rats. In contrast, the effects of carbachol on the depression of synaptic events and the blockade of the afterhyperpolarizations were similar in young and aged animals. In addition, the amplitude of the slow cholinergic excitatory postsynaptic potential induced by stimulation of cholinergic afferents in the presence of physostigmine was also decreased in aged rats. Excitatory postsynaptic potentials and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials following electrical stimulation of stratum radiatum were compared. The amplitude and duration of excitatory postsynaptic potentials were increased in aged rats. The amplitude and duration of the fast inhibitory postsynaptic potential were not significantly affected in aged animals. In contrast, the duration of the slow inhibitory postsynaptic potential was decreased in aged rats. Since the mean baclofen-induced hyperpolarization was only slightly reduced in aged rats, the most likely explanation is a decrease in the release of GABA rather than an alteration in the postsynaptic response mediated by GABAB receptors. A statistically significant correlation was found between the degree of impairment in the spontaneous alternation task and the amplitude of the carbachol-induced depolarization.