Much attention has focused on tachykinin receptors as therapeutic targets for neuropsychiatric disorders, although their expressional distributions in the primate central nervous system (CNS) remain unclear. We cloned the genes encoding the NK-1 and NK-3 tachykinin receptors (referred to as rmNK-1 and rmNK-3) from the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) brain and examined their pharmacological profiles and regional distributions in the CNS. The deduced rmNK-1 amino-acid sequence differed by only two amino acids from the human NK-1 (hNK-1). The deduced rmNK-3 amino-acid sequence was two amino acids shorter than human NK-3 (hNK-3), with a seven-amino-acid difference in sequence. Ligand binding studies revealed that the affinity of rmNK-1 to substance P (SP) was comparable to that of hNK-1 in cell lines that expressed individual receptors stably. Nonpeptide antagonists had similar effects on the binding of rmNK-1 and hNK-1. Affinity of rmNK-3 for NKB was stronger than for SP and the IC50 value was comparable with that of hNK-3. Ca2+ imaging showed that activations of both rmNK-1 and rmNK-3 by specific ligands, SP and senktide, induced increased intracellular Ca2+ in cell lines that stably expressed individual primate tachykinin receptors. The amounts of rmNK-1 and rmNK-3 mRNAs were quantitatively determined in the monkey CNS. The expression of rmNK-1 was observed in all of the cortical and subcortical regions, including the hippocampus and the amygdala. The putamen contained the most NK-1 mRNA in the brain, with less rmNK-3 mRNA found in the cortex compared to rmNK-1 mRNA. In the monkey hippocampus and amygdala, rmNK-1 mRNA was present at markedly higher concentrations than rmNK-3 mRNA. The present results provide an insight into the distinct physiological nature and significance of the NK-1 and NK-3 tachykinin systems in the primate CNS. These findings are indispensable for establishing model systems in the search for a subtype-specific tachykinin receptor agonist and antagonist for the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders.