Latency between an early neurological insult and development of spontaneous recurrent seizures suggests aberrant chronological reorganization in patients with mesial temporal sclerosis associated epilepsy. Kainate-induced status similarly results in delayed development of spontaneous recurrent seizures. Mossy fiber sprouting by the dentate granule cells is a well-characterized manifestation of such temporal structural reorganization in both patients and animal models. However, alterations in other components of hippocampal circuitry have not been evaluated. We present results from studies using precise anterograde and retrograde tract tracing methodologies to evaluate the reorganization of outflow of the CA3 pyramidal cells. Although septotemporal relationships of the normal CA3 outflow tract through the Schaffer collaterals are well known, their aberrant reorganization following kainate-induced spontaneous recurrent seizures is not known. We provide the first definitive evidence of widespread CA3 structural reorganization in the form of sprouting of CA3 axons to widespread areas throughout the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. This includes an apparent increase in the density of projection to areas that normally receive CA3 outflow such as CA1 and subiculum as well as novel projections beyond the confines of the hippocampus to the pre and parasubiculum and medial and lateral entorhinal cortex. We provide the first evidence of novel CA3 Schaffer collateral projection to the entorhinal cortex. The sprouting of CA3 outflow to widespread regions of the hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex may provide insight into how the injured hippocampus propagates unconventional impulse excitation to cortical fields which have a critical role in providing excitatory inputs into the hippocampus possibly setting up reverberating excitatory circuits as well as widespread connections throughout the cortical mantle. Sprouting-related mechanisms may also explain the latency associated with development of spontaneous recurrent seizures, the hallmark of temporal lobe epilepsy.