Long-term synaptic enhancement in the hippocampus has been suggested to cause deficits in spatial performance. Synaptic enhancement has been reported after hippocampal kindling that induced repeated electrographic seizures or afterdischarges (ADs) and after long-term potentiation (LTP) defined as synaptic enhancement without ADs. We studied whether repeated stimulations that gave LTP or ADs resulted in spatial performance deficits on the radial arm maze (RAM) and investigated the minimal number of ADs required for such deficits. Three experimental groups were run as follows: (1) 5 hippocampal ADs in 1 d (5-AD group), (2) 10 hippocampal ADs in 2 d (10-AD group), and (3) 12 -frequency primed-burst stimulations (PBSs) in 2 d in order to induce LTP without ADs (LTP group). Each experimental group was run together with a control group during the same time period. Rats were first trained in a spatial task on a radial arm maze with four of the eight arms baited, then given control or experimental treatment, and maze performance was tested in the first week (1-4 d) and fourth week (22-25 d) after treatment. Basal dendritic population excitatory postsynaptic potentials (pEPSPs) and medial perforant path (MPP)-evoked dentate gyrus population spike and polysynaptic CA1 excitation were recorded before and after experimental and control treatment. Spatial memory errors, in particular reference memory errors, were significantly higher in the 10-AD kindled group than any other group on the first and fourth week after treatment. Spatial memory errors were not significantly different in the 5-AD and LTP groups as compared with any control groups at any time. Basal dendritic pEPSP in CA1 was enhanced for about 1 wk after 12 PBSs, 10 ADs, or 5 ADs, while the dentate gyrus population spike and CA1 polysynaptic excitation evoked by MPP was increased for up to 4 wk after 10 ADs, but not 12 PBSs. Thus, distributed alteration of multiple synaptic transmission in the entorhinal-hippocampal circuit, but not LTP at the basal dendritic synapses in CA1, may disrupt spatial performance after 10 hippocampal ADs.