Ten young adults (aged 20 to 25 years) participated in a functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) study to investigate neural substrates of cross-modal olfactory recognition memory. Before entering the scanner, participants were presented with 16 familiar odors selected from the COLT (Murphy, C., Nordin, S., Acosta, L., 1997. Odor learning, recall, and recognition memory in young and elderly adults. Neuropsychology 11, 126-137) and were then scanned for 3 runs according to a paradigm derived from Stark and Squire (Stark, C.E., Squire, L.R., 2000. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) activity in the hippocampal region during recognition memory. J. Neurosci. 20, 7776-7781). During each run, participants were shown names of odors presented (targets) or not presented (foils) at encoding. Participants distinguished targets from foils via button press. Each run alternated 4 'ON' periods containing 7 targets and 2 foils (36 s) and 4 'OFF' periods with 7 foils and 2 targets (36 s). Data were processed with AFNI (Cox, R.W., 1996. AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages. Comput. Biomed. Res. 29, 162-173) and compared ON and OFF periods, extracting activation in regions that responded during the cross-modal olfactory recognition memory task. Group analysis showed that regions activated during the first run included right hippocampus, piriform/amygdalar area, superior temporal gyrus, anterior cingulate gyrus, inferior frontal/orbitofrontal gyrus, superior/medial frontal gyrus, and bilateral parahippocampal gyrus, inferior parietal lobule, supramarginal gyrus, cerebellum, lingual/fusiform area and middle/posterior cingulate gyrus. Region of interest analysis showed that degree of activation significantly decreased from run 1 to run 3 in the right hippocampus, fusiform gyrus, lingual gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus and middle frontal gyrus but not in other regions, suggesting that these regions sustain a specific function in olfactory recognition memory that attenuates as foils become more familiar with repeated presentation.