During a period of acute ischemia in vivo or oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) in vitro, CA1 neurons depolarize, swell and become overloaded with calcium. Our aim was to test the hypothesis that the initial responses to OGD are at least partly due to transient receptor potential (TRP) channel activation. As some TRP channels are temperature-sensitive, we also compared the effects of pharmacological blockade of the channels with the effects of reducing temperature. Acute hippocampal slices (350 mum) obtained from Wistar rats were submerged in ACSF at 36 degrees C. CA1 neurons were monitored electrophysiologically using extracellular, intracellular or whole-cell patch-clamp recordings. Cell swelling was assessed by recording changes in relative tissue resistance, and changes in intracellular calcium were measured after loading neurons with fura-2 dextran. Blockers of TRP channels (ruthenium red, La3+, Gd3+, 2-APB) or lowering temperature by 3 degrees C reduced responses to OGD. This included: (a) an increased delay to negative shifts of extracellular DC potential; (b) reduction in rate of the initial slow membrane depolarization, slower development of OGD-induced increase in cell input resistance and slower development of whole-cell inward current; (c) reduced tissue swelling; and (d) a smaller rise in intracellular calcium. Mild hypothermia (33 degrees C) and La3+ or Gd3+ (100 microM) showed an occlusion effect when delay to extracellular DC shifts was measured. Expression of TRPM2/TRPM7 (oxidative stress-sensitive) and TRPV3/TRPV4 (temperature-sensitive) channels was demonstrated in the CA1 subfield with RT-PCR. These results indicate that TRP or TRP-like channels are activated by cellular stress and contribute to ischemia-induced membrane depolarization, intracellular calcium accumulation and cell swelling. We also hypothesize that closing of some TRP channels (TRPV3 and/or TRPV4) by lowering temperature may be partly responsible for the neuroprotective effect of hypothermia.