In Experiment I, neurosensory responses from three limbic areas in the cat brain were recorded when cats of differing defensive temperamental traits were exposed to species characteristic threat. The cats investigated were more or less defensive in response to rats and conspecific threat howls. The behavioral disposition of these cats was stable over retest periods of more than one year. It was found that during visual inspection of rats, more defensive cats displayed greater neural activity in the amygdala and the ventromedial hypothalamus than less defensive cats, who showed no change over baseline. Neurosensory response of the amygdala to conspecific threat howls was also found to be greater in more defensive cats. In contrast, there was no neural response to threat howls in the hypothalamus. Neurosensory response to mice was different from the response to rats and threat howls. Visual inspection of the mouse was associated with a decrease in activity in the amygdalas of more defensive cats. Finally, response of the ventral hippocampus was unspecific, appearing to signal only a change in the stimulus environment. The increase in hypothalamic neural activity in response to rats in more defensive cats appeared to be driven by a potentiated output from the amygdala, since the ratio of hypothalamic to amygdala neurosensory response to rats was greater than one in more defensive cats, but equal to one in less defensive cats. Output of the amygdala was directly investigated using evoked potential techniques in Experiment II. Potentials evoked in the hypothalamus by amygdala stimulation were larger in more defensive cats. Size of the hypothalamic potential was highly correlated with the ratio of hypothalamic to amygdala neurosensory response (ratio response) to rats. Removing the effects of size of the hypothalamic evoked potential from the ratio response by analysis of covariance eliminated the difference between more and less defensive cats in ratio response to rats. The significance of these findings for the physiological bases of defensive response to threat and of temperamental traits are discussed.