Nerve growth factor receptor immunoreactivity in the septohippocampal pathway of adult Fischer 344 rats was assessed at the light and electron microscope level. The medial septum possesses immunoreactive somata, dendrites, axons, and terminals. Immunostained somata are either bipolar or multipolar in appearance. Dendritic processes of immunoreactive septal neurons are categorized into two groups: proximal dendrites with smooth plasma membranes and distal dendrites with numerous swellings. Immunoreactive axons within the septum are long and slender and do not possess varicosities. At the electron microscope level, immunoreactivity is confined predominantly to the plasma membrane of cell bodies and dendrites of septal neurons, as well as to the plasma membrane of axons and terminals. Both immunoreactive and nonimmunoreactive terminals that contain clear, spherical vesicles are observed contacting immunoreactive dendrites and somata. Although accumulations of vesicles are evident within these terminals at sites of contact, distinct synaptic specializations are difficult to distinguish due to the localization of reaction product on the apposing plasma membranes. Axons possessing immunoreactivity are also observed in the fimbria-fornix pathway, a major source of afferent inputs to the hippocampus. Immunoreactive axons and terminals are topographically organized in the hippocampal dentate gyrus. The density of immunostained axons and terminals is highest immediately adjacent to the granular layer. In comparison, a moderate density of immunoreactive axons is found in the outer molecular layer and a weak density in the inner molecular, granular, and polymorphic layers. Immunoreactivity is found on the plasma membrane of small unmyelinated axons and terminals aggregated into clusters throughout the dentate gyrus. Definitive examples of axosomatic and axodendritic synapses possessing immunoreactivity presynaptically are not observed. Immunoreactive profiles within the medial septum and hippocampus also circumfuse a small number of intracerebral vessels. Ultrastructural examination reveals that immunoreactivity is present within a narrowed extension of the subarachnoid space and appears to be closely associated with the plasma membrane of leptomeningeal cell processes. The present study provides direct evidence for the cellular distribution of nerve growth factor receptor immunoreactivity in the medial septum and dentate gyrus in the adult rat and offers new insight into the ultrastructural localization of nerve growth factor receptor among septal cholinergic neurons and their efferent projections to the hippocampus.