N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDA) are glutamate-activated ligand-gated ion channels that participate in diverse forms of synaptic plasticity as well as glutamate-dependent excitotoxicity. Inhibition of the NMDA receptor function may underlie some of the behavioral actions associated with acute exposure to ethanol. The sensitivity of NMDA receptors to ethanol is influenced by the subunit composition of the receptor and, by association, with certain cytoskeletal proteins. Previous studies have also suggested that phosphorylation may regulate the sensitivity of NMDA receptors to ethanol. In this study, the ethanol inhibition of recombinant NMDA receptor currents was determined under conditions designed to enhance or inhibit the activity of protein kinase A (PKA). Human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells were transfected with cDNAs encoding NMDA subunits and channel activity was monitored with whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiology. Under control recording conditions, ethanol (100 mM) inhibited NR1/2A and NR1/2B receptor currents by approximately 25-30%. The degree of ethanol inhibition was not affected or was slightly enhanced under conditions designed to enhance PKA activity. This included treatment of cells with cAMP analogs, inclusion of phosphatase inhibitors or purified PKA in the pipette filling solution, co-expression of catalytically active PKA, expression of the NR1 PKA-site phosphorylation site mimic (S897D) or by co-expression of the PKA scaffolding protein yotiao or the dopamine D(1) receptor. Ethanol inhibition of NR1/2A and NR1/2B receptors was not altered when PKA effects were suppressed, either by co-expression of a PKI inhibitory peptide or the phosphorylation-deficient NR1 mutants (S897A, S896A, S896A/S897A). In addition, ethanol inhibition of NMDA-induced currents in cultured cortical or hippocampal neurons was not affected by modulators of PKA. These results suggest that PKA does not appear to play a major role in determining the acute ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors.