Polyunsaturated fatty acids play an important role in the development of pathological states in brain after hypoxia/ischemia. Here, we investigated the role of docosahexaenoic acid (22:6n-3) in brain phospholipids for neuronal survival. We used organotypic cultures of rat brain hippocampal slices exposed to 40 min of oxygen-glucose deprivation, to study the consequences of experimental ischemia. In [14C]docosahexaenoic acid-labeled cultures, oxygen-glucose deprivation induced significant release of radioactive docosahexaenoic acid. This release could be blocked by the selective inhibitor of the Ca2+-independent phospholipase A2, 4-bromoenol lactone (10 microM), when it was added 30 min prior to oxygen-glucose deprivation. Addition of 4-bromoenol lactone at 30 min prior to oxygen-glucose deprivation markedly decreased the neuronal damage induced by oxygen-glucose deprivation. The protective effect was substantially higher in dentate gyrus than in CA1 and CA3 areas. Enrichment of the hippocampal tissue with docosahexaenoic acid by incubation with 10 microM docosahexaenoic acid for 24 h exerted the same neuroprotective effect, which was observed after treatment with 4-bromoenol lactone. In contrast to the 24 h-preincubation, simultaneous addition of docosahexaenoic acid with the onset of oxygen-glucose deprivation had no protective effect. This suggests that incorporation of docosahexaenoic acid into phospholipids is required for the protective effect observed. Then the possible involvement of arachidonic acid metabolism in docosahexaenoic acid-induced neuroprotection was tested. Inhibition of prostaglandin production by ibuprofen produced no change in neuroprotection after 24-h incubation of the hippocampal slices with docosahexaenoic acid. Simultaneous inhibition of Ca2+-independent and Ca2+-dependent phospholipases A2 by treatment with the general phospholipase A2 inhibitor methyl arachidonyl fluorophosphonate (3 microM, 30 min prior to oxygen-glucose deprivation) resulted in significant enhancement of the neuroprotective effect in the dentate gyrus, but not in the CA1 and CA3 areas. In summary, the results reported here indicate that docosahexaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid-containing phospholipids provide potent protection against neurodegeneration after hypoxia/hypoglycemia. Furthermore, our data suggest that Ca2+-independent phospholipase A2, the isoform, which has been largely ignored so far, is a possible target for treatment of ischemia-related pathologies in brain.