INTRODUCTION: Three hypotheses concerning associations between neuroanatomical abnormalities, neuropsychological impairments, and the behavioural manifestations of autism were investigated. The primary hypothesis was that the social interaction impairments diagnostic of autism are associated with deficits of socioemotional perception and abnormalities of the amygdala. One subsidiary hypothesis was that the learning and language impairments that occur in less able individuals with autism are associated with impaired memory, and with abnormalities of hippocampal regions. A second subsidiary hypothesis was that the repetitive behaviour diagnostic of autism is associated with executive deficits and with abnormalities of the prefrontal cortex. Associations between the neuroanatomical regions investigated were also examined. METHODS: Ten adult males with high functioning autism (HFA) were compared with 10 healthy controls matched for age, sex, verbal and nonverbal ability. Hypothesis-driven structural MRI and neuropsychological tests were used to collect neuroanatomical and neuropsychological data on all subjects. A version of the Wing Autism Diagnostic Interview Checklist was used to collect clinical data on the HFA subjects. RESULTS: Strong convergent evidence in support of the amygdala hypothesis was obtained, and preliminary support for the hippocampal/parahippocampal hypothesis. No clear evidence was obtained in support of the prefrontal hypothesis. Patterns of associations amongst volume measures within and between medial temporal and prefrontal regions suggest stronger within-region and weaker between-region associations in the HFA group compared with controls. CONCLUSIONS: These findings are discussed in terms of a model of autism in which selective abnormalities of the amygdala and hippocampus (in all cases) and of the parahippocampal gyrus (in lower functioning cases) are implicated, and in which a disruption of coordinated limbic and prefrontal activity may be critical.