The distribution and levels of messenger RNAs encoding the alpha 1, beta 1, beta 2, beta 3, and gamma 2 subunits of the GABAA receptor in the developing and adult rat brain were investigated using quantitative in situ hybridization histochemistry and subunit-specific probes. Regional localization of the subunit messenger RNAs was determined with film autoradiography and expression in identified neuronal cell populations was examined using higher resolution techniques. Each of the GABAA receptor subunit messenger RNAs exhibits a distinct pattern of localization in the developing and adult brain. Of the subunits examined, the alpha 1, beta 2, and gamma 2 are the most abundant and are found in many brain regions, including the olfactory bulb, cortex, hippocampus, thalamic nuclei, and inferior colliculus. In addition, these subunit messenger RNAs are prominent in the cerebellum where virtually all cells of the deep cerebellar nuclei and Purkinje cell layer are labeled. The levels of most of the subunit messenger RNAs, with the exception of that encoding the beta 1 subunit, increase during postnatal development. While the alpha 1, beta 2, and gamma 2 subunit messenger RNAs rise in parallel in many regions and identified cell populations, different subsets of receptor subunit messenger RNAs are co-ordinately expressed at other sites. The greatest increases in subunit messenger RNA levels occur in the cerebellar cortex during the second postnatal week, a period coincident with cerebellar maturation. The co-distribution of different GABAA receptor subunit messenger RNAs in various regions of the developing and adult nervous systems supports the hypothesis that multiple receptor compositions exist. Moreover, that different subunit messenger RNAs exhibit coordinate changes in expression in different regions and cell populations suggests that receptor gene expression is modulated by cell type-specific signals. The temporal changes in subunit messenger RNA levels in the cerebellum raise the possibility that synaptogenesis may play a role in receptor gene regulation in this brain region.