OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of deltamethrin (DM) on the mRNA expression of copper-zinc dependent SOD (CuZn-SOD), glutathione reductase (GR) and gamma glutamylcysteine synthetase (gamma-GCS) light subunit (GCSl), as well as on expression of both mRNA and protein of gamma-GCS heavy subunit (GCSh) and NFE2 related factor 2 (Nrf2) in cerebral cortex and hippocampus of rats. METHODS: Eighteen Wistar male rats were randomizedly divided into three groups, six for each group. The low dosage and high dosage DM treated groups were administrated intraperitoneally with DM (the daily dosage was 3.125, 12.500 mg/kg BWT respectively) for five consecutive days while the control group was administered intraperitoneally with olive oil. The relative amount of mRNA expression of these genes was measured by the method of reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (n = 6). The protein level was detected by the method of immunohistochemistry and image analysis system (n = 4). RESULTS: There was no change in mRNA expression level of CuZn-SOD, GR, GCSh and Nrf2 gene in both cerebral cortex and hippocampus tissue in rats administrated with DM. However, the mRNA level of GCSl gene in cerebral cortex of high dosage group as well as in both cerebral cortex and hippocampus of the low dosage group was significantly lower than that in corresponding tissue in the control group, and was decreased to 71.1%, 63.6% and 75.2% of mRNA level of corresponding tissue in the control group (P < 0.01). There was no obvious effect on protein level of both GCSh and Nrf2 in CA1, CA2, CA3 and dentate gyrus (DG) of hippocampus as well as on that in cerebral cortex in rats treated with DM. CONCLUSION: Under the experimental conditions, there is no obvious effect in the mRNA expression level of CuZn-SOD, GR gene, as well as on expression of both mRNA and protein of Nrf2 gene in both cerebral cortex and hippocampus tissue in rats administered with DM. DM depresses the mRNA expression of GCSl gene, but does not affect the mRNA expression of GCSh gene.