1. Conventional intracellular and extracellular recording techniques were used to investigate the physiology and pharmacology of epileptiform bursts induced by 4-aminopyridine (4-AP, 50 microM) in the CA3 area of rat hippocampal slices maintained in vitro. 2. 4-AP-induced epileptiform bursts, consisting of a 25-to 80-ms depolarizing shift of the neuronal membrane associated with three to six fast action potentials, occurred at the frequency of 0.61 +/- 0.29 (SD)/s. The bursts were generated synchronously by CA3 neurons and were triggered by giant excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs). A second type of spontaneous activity consisting of a slow depolarization also occurred but at a lower rate (0.04 +/- 0.2/s). 3. The effects of 4-AP on EPSPs and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) evoked by mossy fiber stimulation were studied on neurons impaled with a mixture of K acetate and 2(triethyl-amino)-N-(2,6-dimethylphenyl) acetamide (QX-314)-filled microelectrodes. After the addition of 4-AP, the EPSP became potentiated and was followed by the appearance of a giant EPSP. This giant EPSP completely obscured the early IPSP recorded under control conditions and inverted at -32 +/- 3.9 mV (n = 4), suggesting that both inhibitory and excitatory conductances were involved in its generation. IPSPs evoked by Schaffer collateral stimulation increased in amplitude and duration after 4-AP application. 4. The spontaneous field bursts and the stimulus-induced giant EPSP induced by 4-AP were not affected by N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists 3-3 (2-carboxy piperazine-4-yl) propyl-1-phosphonate (CPP) and DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovalerate (APV) but were blocked by quisqualate/kainate receptor antagonists 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (CNQX) and 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (DNQX). CNQX also abolished the presence of small spontaneously occurring EPSPs, thereby disclosing the presence of bicuculline-sensitive (BMI, 20 microM) IPSPs. 5. Small, nonsynchronous EPSPs played an important role in the generation of 4-AP-induced epileptiform activity. 1) After the addition of 4-AP, small EPSPs appeared randomly on the baseline and then became clustered to produce a depolarizing envelope of irregular shape that progressively formed an epileptiform burst, 2) These small EPSPs were more numerous in the 100 ms period that preceded burst onset. 3) The frequency of occurrence of small EPSPs was positively correlated with the frequency of occurrence of synchronous bursts. 4) Small EPSPs and bursts were similarly decreased after the addition of different concentrations of CNQX (IC50 in both cases of approximately 1.2 microM).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)