OBJECTIVE: Seizures occur more frequently in the neonatal period than at any other time in life. A controversy which has been debated for the recent years is whether recurrent neonatal seizures can lead to long-term adverse consequences or are simply a reflection of underlying brain dysfunction and are not intrinsically harmful. Despite numerous clinical observations showed that seizures may be detrimental to the developing brain, the pathological mechanism has not yet been completely understood. The goal of this study was to investigate what effect was induced by recurrent seizures in neonatal rats on dentate granule cell neurogenesis. METHODS: Sixty-four neonatal Wistar rats were randomly divided into seizure group (n = 40) and control group (n = 24). The rats of seizure group were subjected to three times of pilocarpine injections intraperitonealy at postnatal day 1 (P1), 4 (P4) and 7 (P7). Neonatal rats of the control group were given saline injection (i.p.) at the same time points. The rat were sacrificed separately at the next four time points: immediately after the third seizure (P7), the fourth day after the seizure (P11), the fourteenth day (P21) and the forty fifth day (P52), corresponding control group rats were killed accordingly. The rats in both seizure and control groups were given bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) injection 36 hours before sacrifice to indicate newly generated cells. Brain tissue sections were prepared and subjected to Nissl staining for neuronal loss, by BrdU labeling for cell proliferation and by BrdU + NF200 (neurofilament 200) double labeling for the identification of the newly formed cells. RESULTS: The numbers of BrdU-labeled cells were age-dependent in the control group, decreased with age, and their morphorlogy and distribution changed (P < 0.01). BrdU-labeled cells decreased significantly in the seizure group compared with the matched controls at P7 and P11 (P < 0.01), while at P21 there was no significant difficence between the two groups. On the contrary, BrdU-labeled cells increased significantly in the seizure group compared with the matched controls at P52 (P < 0.01). Most BrdU-labeled cells in granular cell layer (GCL) of both seizure group and control group coexpressed NF200. CONCLUSION: Recurrent seizures during neonatal period lead to decreased neurogenesis at the early stage after the third seizure, and at later time points increase of neurogenesis. Most of newly generated cells can differentiate into neurons.