1. Intracellular recordings from CA1 pyramidal neurons in the rat hippocampal slice have been used to study synaptic transmission after maximal orthodromic stimulation of the Schaffer collateral-commissural fibers. Paired-pulse stimulation was used to investigate how the first (conditioning) stimulation influenced the response to the second (test) stimulation. 2. When the test stimulation was delivered up to approximately 4 s after the conditioning stimulation, the late phase of the excitatory postsynaptic synaptic potential (EPSP) was increased ("late-phase facilitation") whereas the fast (f-) and the slow (s-) inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) were depressed. 3. In terms of appearance and time course, facilitation of the intracellularly recorded EPSP was similar to that of the extracellularly recorded field EPSP in stratum radiatum. 4. The s-IPSP is not involved in facilitation of the EPSP. To show this, we counteracted the s-IPSP either by repolarizing the membrane potential to the resting level or by intracellularly injecting the quaternary lignocaine derivative QX 314. Facilitation of the late phase of the EPSP was unaffected by either procedure. 5. The conditioned response was modified in two ways when the stimulation was delivered at the equilibrium potential for the f-IPSP (Ef-IPSP) and the s-IPSP had been blocked by intracellular injection of QX 314. The amplitude of the EPSP was increased, and the repolarizing phase was delayed with an apparent depolarizing shift of Ef-IPSP. This effect was present at pulse intervals greater than 20 ms and was maximal after 150 ms. Facilitation could be detected at interpulse intervals of up to 4 s. 6. The gamma-aminobutyric acid-B (GABAB) agonist baclofen (1 microM) reduced late-phase facilitation by preferentially increasing the unconditioned response, such that this came to resemble a conditioned response in control medium. 7. The f-IPSP was isolated pharmacologically to investigate its role in the facilitation of the EPSP. This was done by blocking the s-IPSP with QX314 and the EPSP with a mixture of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor blocker, 2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV, 50 microM), and the non-NMDA receptor blocker 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (CNQX, 10 microM). An f-IPSP was then evoked by stimulating the interneurons directly. This potential could be blocked by the GABAA receptor antagonist bicuculline (20 microM), thereby confirming the successful isolation of GABAAergic transmission. 8. With paired-pulse stimulation, the amplitude of the conditioned f-IPSP was depressed.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)