A detailed neurochemical analysis of the distribution of markers for the most relevant neurotransmitter systems within the rat hippocampal formation has been performed. The hippocampi, obtained from unfrozen brains of male Sprague-Dawley rats were subdissected into tissue parts containing mainly CA1, CA3 or the dentate gyrus, respectively. Each part was further divided into ventral and dorsal halves. In these six hippocampal subregions the concentrations of noradrenaline, dopamine, serotonin, 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid and the putative neurotransmitter amino acids glutamate, aspartate, GABA, glycine and taurine, and the levels of somatostatin and neuropeptide Y and the activities of choline acetyltransferase, acetylcholinesterase and glutamate decarboxylase were measured. A marked heterogeneity in the subregional distribution of markers for various neurotransmitter systems within the hippocampal formation was observed. Each neuronal marker was characterized by an individual pattern of distribution. Most of the markers showed a concentration-gradient, increasing from dorsal to ventral; only taurine was more abundant in the dorsal than in the ventral parts and no dorsoventral difference was seen for aspartate, glycine and neuropeptide Y. The highest molar ratios of total 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol to noradrenaline and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid to serotonin were found in the dorsal hippocampus. The levels of noradrenaline, GABA and glutamate decarboxylase activity were highest in the dentate gyrus and lowest in CA1. The concentrations of somatostatin were highest in CA1; those of serotonin were highest in CA3. Highest activities of choline acetyltransferase and acetylcholinesterase were found in the dentate gyrus; lowest activities were found in CA3. In CA3 the lowest values of glutamate, aspartate, taurine and somatostatin were also found. The heterogeneity in the distribution of individual neurochemical markers allows insights into possible functional differences of hippocampal subregions and provides a relevant basis for future neurochemical investigations in this brain area.