The most well-documented synaptic rearrangement associated with temporal lobe epilepsy is mossy fiber sprouting (MFS). MFS is a pronounced expansion of granule cell mossy fiber axons into the inner dentate molecular layer. The recurrent excitatory network formed by MFS is hypothesized to play a critical role in epileptogenesis, which is the transformation of the normal brain into one that is prone to recurrent spontaneous seizures. While many studies have focused on the functional consequences of MFS, relatively few have investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying the increased propensity of mossy fibers to invade the inner molecular layer. We hypothesized that changes in two components of the extracellular matrix, hyaluronan and its primary receptor, CD44, contribute to MFS. Hyaluronan contributes to laminar-specificity in the hippocampus and increases in hyaluronan and CD44 are associated with temporal lobe epilepsy. We tested our hypothesis in an in vitro model of MFS using a combination of histological and biochemical approaches. Application of kainic acid (KA) to organotypic hippocampal slice cultures induced robust MFS into the inner dentate molecular layer compared with vehicle-treated controls. Degradation of hyaluronan with hyaluronidase significantly reduced but did not eliminate KA-induced MFS, suggesting that hyaluronan played a permissive role in MFS, but that loss of hyaluronan signaling alone was not sufficient to block mossy fiber reorganization. Comparison of CD44 expression with MFS revealed that when CD44 expression in the molecular layers was high, MFS was minimal and when CD44 expression/function was reduced following KA treatment or with function blocking antibodies, MFS was increased. The time course of KA-induced reductions in CD44 expression was identical to the temporal progression of KA-induced MFS reported previously in hippocampal slice cultures, suggesting that reduced CD44 expression may help promote MFS. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying MFS may lead to therapeutic interventions that limit epileptogenesis.