The short-term plasticity of synaptic transmission has usually been related to neurotransmitter release-dependent processes. In this work, we describe a calcium- and release-independent augmentation of the fiber volley (FVA) that appears during stimulation of the Wistar rat commissural/Schaffer collateral afferents at 10-Hz. Among the possible mechanisms involved in this phenomenon, an increment in sodium channel density or the facilitation of recovery from inactivation does not seem to be responsible for this effect since the depolarization rate of the somatic action potentials (APs) of CA3 pyramidal cells decreases during the 10-Hz stimulation. On the other hand, an increase in the synchronization of the APs can be observed during the very first pulses of the 10-Hz tetanus. However, the major part of the FVA occurs with any increase in synchronization of AP firing. Finally, a strong increase in the firing probability, with kinetics similar to that observed with the FVA, appears at 10-Hz stimulation when APs are induced at threshold intensities. This hyperexcitability seems to be mediated by a residual depolarization that persists for more than 100 ms after the AP. The nature of this post-spike depolarization is uncertain since it persists in the absence of extracellular calcium and was not blocked by the application of phenytoin (100 microM), and this excludes the implication of either calcium or sodium-persistent currents. Additionally, the increase of the stimulation strength did not alter this depolarization, which suggests that the presumed extracellular potassium accumulation produced after the synchronic stimulation of APs is not involved in the depolarization. Interestingly, the slow post-depolarization induced by both supra- and subthreshold pulses is well fitted by a single exponential decay with similar time constants, an indication that the tail depolarization may represent passive discharge of the membrane following an incomplete repolarization of the AP.