Our previous microdialysis study demonstrated that both ethanol (EtOH) and acetaldehyde (ACe) decrease in vivo acetylcholine (ACh) release in the medial frontal cortex of freely moving rats. To better understand the mechanisms of EtOH and ACe's effects on the cholinergic system in the brain, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) expression was examined at 40 and 240 min after a dose of EtOH (1 g/kg) in the rat frontal cortex and hippocampus. The control group was treated with 0.9% saline, and other groups received EtOH or cyanamide (CY, 50 mg/kg, a potent aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor) and 60 min later by EtOH intraperitoneally. Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis revealed that ChAT mRNA levels were decreased by 72.8% and 71.6% in the EtOH and CY+EtOH groups, respectively, at 40 min after EtOH injection compared with saline in the frontal cortex. The hippocampal ChAT levels were reduced by 76.5% and 53.0% in the EtOH and CY+EtOH groups, respectively, at this time. CY+EtOH-induced depletion in ChAT mRNA levels was markedly higher than EtOH in the hippocampus. A similar decrease pattern of ChAT was observed at protein levels as determined by Western blot, but the reduced ChAT levels were significantly higher in the CY+EtOH group as compared with the EtOH group both in the frontal cortex and hippocampus. At 240 min after EtOH injection, the EtOH group had no effect on ChAT at mRNA levels, as compared with saline, whereas CY+EtOH group induced a significant decrease in ChAT mRNA expression to 62.0% and 65.5% in the frontal cortex and hippocampus, respectively. These data were consistent with the results of the Western blot analysis. AChE expression at mRNA levels was not changed at either 40 or 240 min after EtOH dosing in either of these groups in the frontal cortex and hippocampus. Within 40 and 240 min, a statistically significant difference in ChAT expression at mRNA and protein levels was found in the EtOH and CY+EtOH groups both in the frontal cortex and hippocampus. The data obtained from this study demonstrate that EtOH and ACe concentrations decreased ChAT expression at 40 and 240 min after EtOH administration in the frontal cortex and hippocampus, and this result suggests that reduced ChAT expression is strongly related to a decrease in ACh release in the rat brain.