High level of adenosine A1 receptor-like immunoreactivity has been found in the CA2/CA3a region of adult rat hippocampus, but its roles in the neuronal activity or signal propagation in hippocampus and its intracellular cascade remain to be studied. In this study, we examined the relation between adenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) cascade and suppression of synaptic transmission by endogenous adenosine through adenosine A1 receptor in the CA2 area. In transverse hippocampal slice, maximal electrical stimulation of the hilus region (0.6 mA) only evoked small population spikes (PSs) in the CA2 area (0.5 mV). In the presence of forskolin (20 micromol/L), a direct adenylate cyclase activator, PSs in CA2 were increased to 1.1 mV. When 8-cyclopentyltheophylline (8CPT, 2 micromol/L), an adenosine A1 receptor antagonist, was added in the presence of 20 micromol/L forskolin, PSs with an average amplitude of 4.7 mV were recorded in the CA2 area, much higher than the sum of the amplitude of PSs in the presence of forskolin and 8CPT alone. To test whether this synergistic potentiation results from the additive activation of cAMP cascade, the cAMP content in hippocampal slices was measured with enzyme immunoassay (EIA). Results showed that 8CPT did not increase the cAMP content in CA2 with or without forskolin. Co-application of forskolin and Ro 20-1724, a cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase-IV inhibitor, only increased PSs in CA2 to 1.3 mV but increased cAMP content by 4.4 times. On the other hand, co-application of 8CPT and 1, 9-dideoxyforskolin, a forskolin analog which has no effect on adenylate cyclase, did not mimic the synergistic effect of 8CPT and forskolin on PSs in CA2. These results indicate that up-regulation of adenylate cyclase activity and inhibition of adenosine A1 receptor activity synergistically facilitate the neuronal activity in the CA2 area and the effect of adenosine A1 receptor antagonist is via non-cAMP cascade. These data also suggest that acting on adenosine A1 receptors, endogenous and extragenous adenosine/adenosine A1 agonist(s) inhibit neuronal activity through different pathways.