The axonal transport blocker colchicine has been extensively used in immunohistochemical studies to induce accumulation of neuroactive compounds, especially neuropeptides, in neuronal somata and thus improve their visualization. To assess whether colchicine might, in addition, influence the synthesis of such compounds, we have now used in situ hybridization to examine the levels of mRNAs encoding for several neuropeptides (galanin [GAL], cholecystokinin [CCK], somatostatin [SOM], neuropeptide Y [NPY]) and neurotransmitter-synthesizing enzymes (choline acetyltransferase [ChAT], tyrosine hydroxylase [TH], amino acid decarboxylase [AADC], and glutamic acid decarboxylase [GAD]) after intraventricular administration of the drug. The results show that colchicine differentially modifies the levels of several mRNA species in different brain areas. Thus GAL mRNA levels increase in virtually all regions examined, including the basal forebrain, hypothalamus, dorsal raphe nucleus, locus coeruleus, and nucleus tractus solitarii. In addition, after colchicine treatment, GAL mRNA appears to be induced in the ipsilateral hemisphere in regions such as the cortex, hippocampus, striatum, lateral septum, and some nuclei of the thalamus as well as within white matter, where it cannot be detected in control animals. Although GAL mRNA in the vast majority of cases is neuronal, some findings indicate a possible glial localization. In parallel, colchicine depletes ChAT mRNA and increases GAD mRNA in the basal forebrain and striatum and decreases AADC mRNA in the dorsal raphe nucleus and locus coeruleus. In the latter nucleus, NPY and TH mRNA levels are increased by colchicine. In contrast, TH mRNA and also CCK mRNA levels decrease in the substantia nigra. In the cortex, hippocampus, and thalamus ipsilateral to colchicine injection CCK mRNA levels are markedly decreased, whereas SOM mRNA is decreased and NPY mRNA increased in the hippocampus but unchanged in the cortex. The results are discussed with reference to the possible artifacts that the use of colchicine might induce in immunohistochemical mapping studies and in relation to possible neurotoxic actions of colchicine, in some cases perhaps related to impaired retrograde transport of growth factor(s).