Prenatal exposed to an anti-inflammatory drug is a major problem for the developing central nervous system. It is not well known the effect of prenatal exposed to a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug on the hippocampus. Total neuron number in one side of the cornu ammonis (CA) and gyrus dentatus (GD) of the hippocampal formation in control and drug-treated (diclofenac sodium, DS) groups of male rats was estimated using the optical fractionator technique. Each main group has also two subgroups that are 4 weeks old (4W-old) and 20 weeks old (20W-old). In CA, no significant difference between 4W-old DS-treated and their control was found, but a significant difference was observed between 20W-old DS-treated and their controls. A decreasing of neuron number was 12% for 20W-old DS-treated group. In GD, a decreasing of the granule cell number in 4W-old of DS-treated group was seen but an increasing of granule cell number was found in the 20W-old drug-treated rats in comparison to its control group, 7% and 9%, respectively. Although an increasing of neuron number in CA at the control group was seen with age, from 4th week to 20th week (10%), age-dependent substantial granule cell decline (17%) was observed in GD. No age effect on the total cell numbers of CA and GD of the drug-treated groups was seen in comparison to 4W-old week and 20W-old. A pronounced neuron loss observed in the drug-treated group may be attributed to the neurotoxicity of diclofenac sodium (DS) on the developing hippocampal formation. Age-dependent neuron increase in the CA of 20W-old and neuron decline in GD of 20W-old control groups may be a result of a dual effect of saline injection during the fetal life, since these animals were exposed to a stress of 15-day-period of saline injection, prenatal stress. The reason of no age effect on CA and GD cell number in the drug-treated groups may be attributed to the depletion of the progenitor cells due to neurotoxicity of DS in the fetal life of these animals.