We report here the in vivo effects of estrogen (E2) on modulation of synaptic plasticity and the agonistic (estrogen-like) role of selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), tamoxifen (TAM) in the CA1 of the rat hippocampus. Effects on synaptophysin (SYP), a presynaptic vesicular protein, and phosphorylated cyclic AMP responsive element-binding (p-CREB) protein, a signal transduction pathway molecule, were studied using the ovariectomized (OVX) experimental rat model. Bilateral ovariectomy was performed on 40 rats and these were divided into 4 groups based on the treatment they received (at 2 weeks post-ovariectomy, a subcutaneous injection daily for 4 weeks) viz., OVX+E2 (0.1 mg/kg body weight), OVX+TAM (0.05 mg/kg body weight), OVX+vehicle and one group served as OVX control. An additional 10 animals served as the ovary intact control group. At the end of the treatment schedule, five animals/group were used for immunohistochemical staining of SYP and p-CREB using specific antibodies with peroxidase anti-peroxidase technique on paraformaldehyde-fixed cryostat sections. Protein estimation and Western blot analysis coupled with densitometric analysis (using gel-documentation system and image analysis software) were performed on unfixed hippocampus collected from rest of the five animals/group. Serum estradiol levels were estimated with radioimmunoassay prior to sacrifice. The results revealed that ovariectomy reduced SYP and p-CREB expression whereas E2 or TAM administration resulted in their upregulation. Serum estradiol levels of E2 administered animals were comparable with the ovary intact group whereas those of TAM administered group persisted in the range of OVX controls. To conclude, long-term estrogen therapy modulates the synaptic plasticity of hippocampal neurons and presumably, the agonist biocharacter of TAM as observed in the present investigations, may in the long run have a potential in the treatment and prevention of various estrogen-related disorders.