Membrane potential oscillations (MPOs) of 2-10 Hz and up to 6 mV were found in almost all stable hippocampal CA1 and CA3 neurons in the in vitro slice preparation. MPOs were prominent for pyramidal cells but less pronounced in putative interneurons. MPOs were activated at threshold depolarizations that evoked a spike and the frequency of the MPOs increased with the level of depolarization. MPOs were distinct from and seemed to regulate spiking, with a spike often riding near the top of a depolarizing MPO wave. Analysis of the periodicity of the oscillations indicate that the period of MPOs did not depend on the afterhyperpolarization (AHP) following a single spike. MPOs persisted in low (0-0.1 mM) Ca2+ medium, with or without Cd2+ (0.2 mM), when synaptic transmission was blocked. Choline-substituted low-Na+ (0-26 mM) medium, 3 microM tetrodotoxin (TTX) or intracellular injection of QX-314 reduced or abolished the fast Na(+)-spike and reduced inward anomalous rectification. About 40% of CA1 neurons had no MPOs after Na+ currents were blocked, suggesting that these MPOs were Na(+)-dependent. In about 60% of the cells, a large depolarization activated Ca(2+)-dependent MPOs and slow spikes. MPOs were not critically affected by extracellular Ba2+ or Cs2+, or by 0.2 mM 4-aminopyridine, with or without 2 mM tetraethylammonium (TEA). However, in 5-10 mM TEA medium, MPOs were mostly replaced by 0.2-3 Hz spontaneous bursts of wide-duration spikes followed by large AHPs. Low Ca2+, Cd2+ medium greatly reduced the spike width but not the spike-bursts. In conclusion, each cycle of an MPO in normal medium probably consists of a depolarization phase mediated by Na+ currents, possibly mixed with Ca2+ currents activated at a higher depolarization. The repolarization/hyperpolarization phase may be mediated by Na+/Ca2+ current inactivation and partly by TEA-sensitive, possibly the delayed rectifier, K+ currents. The presence of prominent intrinsic, low-threshold MPOs in all hippocampal pyramidal neurons suggests that MPOs may play an important role in information processing in the hippocampus.