This study deals with the synaptology, morphologically identified postsynaptic targets, and origin of somatostatin (SOM) fibers in the rat lateral septal area (LSA) with special reference to those forming pericellular baskets. Septal vibratome sections were immunostained for SOM-14 in 3 experimental groups: control animals, rats subjected to a chronic transection of the ascending afferents to the septum, and animals with acute fimbria-fornix lesion. Light microscopy revealed that the SOM-immunoreactive fibers form pericellular baskets predominantly in the intermediate and ventral parts of the caudal half of the LSA. Electron microscopic analysis showed that the somatospiny neurons are postsynaptic targets of these pericellular baskets. Eight days after a unilateral cut placed at the ventral border of the septum, virtually all SOM-immunoreactive axon terminals disappeared from the ipsilateral intermediate and ventral LSA, and they were substantially reduced in the dorsal LSA. However, in these rats SOM-positive neurons could be observed in the LSA on the lesioned, but not on the contralateral side. Furthermore, on the lesion side of the anterior periventricular hypothalamus an increase was detected both in the number and the intensity of immunostaining of SOM-positive neurons. Thirty-six h following a unilateral transection of the fimbria-fornix, the SOM-immunoreactive axon terminals in the LSA remained intact; only immunonegative degenerated hippocamposeptal boutons were detected forming synaptic contacts with somatospiny neurons. Axosomatic synapses of SOM-positive boutons regularly appeared at the neck of somatic spines which were postsynaptic to degenerated hippocamposeptal fibers. The results indicate that the septal SOM fibers are of multiple origin. Those forming pericellular baskets in the LSA originate in ventral extraseptal, probably periventricular hypothalamic areas. SOM fibers scattered in the dorsal LSA are most likely processes of local SOM neurons. The accumulation of immunoreactive SOM in some cells of the undercut septum is a sign of axonal lesion, indicating that these neurons project outside the septum. The SOM innervation of somatospiny neurons which also receive hippocampal input and have been reported to contain gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) may be a morphological substrate of the SOM-related disinhibition in the LSA.