Male Sprague-Dawley rats injected sc with a single sublethal dose of the organophosphate nerve agent, soman (100 micrograms/kg), had motor limbic seizures within 5-15 min. Pretreatment with a single dose of memantine HCl (MEM, 18 mg/kg, sc), alone or in combination with atropine sulfate (ATS, 16 mg/kg, sc), before soman prevented seizures without sedation or ataxia. Rats appeared normal or demonstrated increased exploratory activity. Excessive salivation, a peripheral manifestation of soman intoxication, was decreased by ATS, but pretreatment with ATS alone did not prevent seizures. After seizure onset, MEM +/- ATS, but not ATS, abolished seizures. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity in several brain regions (cortex, stem, striatum, and hippocampus) was markedly reduced by soman, but not by MEM, ATS, or MEM + ATS. Preadministration of MEM + ATS in vivo significantly protected AChE from inhibition by soman. Memantine reduced inhibition of AChE activity in crude brain homogenates by soman, but not by edrophonium (anionic site inhibitor) or decamethonium (peripheral site inhibitor). Thus, MEM may bind to a different modulatory site, not yet characterized, to protect AChE. When given after onset of soman-induced seizures, treatment with MEM +/- ATS did not reactivate AChE although seizures were controlled, suggesting additional anticonvulsant mechanisms of action. At concentrations (10(-4) to 5 x 10(-4) M) which did not significantly alter the spontaneous firing of action potentials (APs), MEM limited sustained high frequency repetitive firing (SRF) induced by depolarization of spinal cord (mouse and rat) and neocortical (mouse) neurons in monolayer-dissociated cell culture. In the same range of concentrations, ATS both limited SRF and suppressed spontaneous activity, suggesting toxicity. In addition, MEM and ATS reversibly produced use-dependent block of depolarizing responses to acetylcholine (ACh) applied by pressure ejection to spinal cord neurons. Thus, the anticonvulsant efficacy of MEM, with or without ATS, may have resulted from a combination of actions, including protection of AChE from inhibition by soman, limitation of high frequency firing of APs, and blockade of excitatory postsynaptic responses to ACh.