To understand how information is coded at single hippocampal synapses during high-frequency activity, we imaged NMDA receptor-mediated Ca(2+) responses in spines of CA1 neurons using two-photon microscopy. Although discrete quantal events were not readily apparent during continuous theta-burst stimulation (TBS), we found that the steady-state dendritic Ca(2+) response was spatially restricted (half-width < 1 microm), voltage dependent and sensitive to MK-801, indicating that that it was mediated by activation of NMDA receptors at single synapses. Partial antagonism of NMDA receptors caused a similar reduction of NMDA EPSCs (measured at the soma) and local dendritic Ca(2+) signals, suggesting that, like EPSCs, the steady-state Ca(2+) signal was made up of a linear addition of quantal events. Statistical analyses of the steady-response suggested that the quantal size did not change dramatically during TBS. Deconvolution of TBS-evoked Ca(2+) responses revealed a heterogeneous population of synapses differing in their capacity to signal high-frequency information, with an average effective steady-state release rate of approximately 2.6 vesicles synapse(-1)s(-1). To assess how the optically determined release rates compare with population measures we analysed the rate of decay of peak EPSCs during train stimulation. From these studies, we estimated a unitary vesicular replenishment rate of 0.02 s(-1), which corresponds to an average release rate of approximately 0.8-2 vesicles s(-1) at individual synapses. Additionally, extracellular recordings from single Schaffer collaterals revealed that spikes propagate reliably during TBS. Hence, during high-frequency activity, Schaffer collaterals conduct spikes with high fidelity, but release quanta with relatively lower efficiency, leaving NMDA receptor function largely intact and synapse specific. Heterogeneity in release rates between synapses suggests that similar patterns of presynaptic action potentials could trigger different forms of plasticity at individual synapses.