Drugs and neurotoxins activate specific neural circuits by increasing or decreasing the formation and release of neurotransmitters, such as nitric oxide (NO), and by inducing immediate early genes, such as FOS. We have previously shown that Phoneutria nigriventer spider venom (PNV) impairs the microtubule-dependent transcellular barrier of the blood-brain interface and causes structural alterations in perivascular astrocytic end-feet without producing morphological changes in central neuronal cells. In the present study, we used FOS and neuronal nitric oxide synthase (n-NOS) immunolabeling to investigate the ability of PNV to activate the central nervous system. Three groups of rats were used: the first group received a sublethal dose of PNV (850 microg/kg, via a tail vein), the second received an equal volume of 0.9% saline (sham group) and the third group received no injection. Envenomed rats showed salivation, lachrymation, tremors and flaccidity followed by spastic paralysis of the hind limbs and convulsions. Cryosections (30 microm thick) were serially collected at 600 microm intervals for free-floating immunohistochemical analysis. FOS-like positive neurons predominated in motor-related areas such as dorsolateral (dlPAG) and ventral periaqueductal gray matter (vPAG), frontal (FCM) and parietal motor cortex (PCM), and periventricular thalamic nucleus (PTN) and in acute stress-related areas (rhinal cortex and lateral septal nuclei). The greatest relative increases in FOS-like positive neurons occurred in the vPAG, PCM and PTN motor-related areas. n-NOS-positive neurons predominated in the periventricular thalamic nuclei, followed by the dorsolateral periaqueductal gray matter and parietal cortex motor area. The marked activation of motor areas and, to a lesser extent, of acute stress-related areas suggested the involvement of neuronal pathways in these regions in the response to envenoming by PNV. In addition, the occurrence of n-NOS immunolabeling in some anatomical regions with FOS-like positive neurons suggests that NO may modulate the response to PNV in these regions.