Polysialylation is a posttranslational modification of the neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM). In the adult brain, polysialylated NCAM (PSA-NCAM) is restricted to regions of neurogenesis and neuroplasticity, where PSA promotes plastic changes. Because a variety of plastic changes including neurogenesis have been suggested to be functionally involved in the pathophysiology of epilepsies, it is of specific interest to define the impact of the PSA-NCAM system on development and progression of this disease and associated comorbidities. Here, we studied the impact of transient enzymatic depolysialylation of NCAM on the pathophysiology in the amygdala kindling model, a chronic rodent model of temporal lobe epilepsy. The investigations focused on seizure-induced neurogenesis, seizure progression, and on the development of kindling-associated changes in behavior and cognition. Loss of PSA decreased the number of hippocampal newborn cells that incorporated BrdU during the kindling process and the number of new neurons that were ectopically located in the hilus. The persistence of basal dendrites has been suggested to be a hallmark of newborn granule cells in the epileptic brain. Loss of PSA increased the number of cells with persistent basal dendrites. The modification of the hippocampal cell proliferation rate and the fate of newborn neurons which occurred as a consequence of PSA removal did not affect the generation of a hyperexcitable kindled network or associated behavioral changes. Kindling progression was comparable in rats with and without removal of PSA. In contrast, loss of PSA increased acute seizure susceptibility as indicated by reduced seizure thresholds before kindling. The data indicate that hippocampal proliferation rates and ectoptic hilar newborn neurons are less critical for epileptic network generation. The PSA-NCAM system was not substantiated as a target for antiepileptogenic strategies. However, its impact on ectopic newborn neurons gives evidence that modulation of PSA-NCAM function may be a strategy to promote neuroregeneration in different central nervous system insults.