Since a previous study demonstrated that ovariectomized rats present an activation of Na(+), K(+)-ATPase and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activities, in the present study we investigated the influence of vitamins E plus C or soy isoflavones on the effects elicited by ovariectomy on the activities of these enzyme in hippocampus of ovariectomized rats. We also determined the effect of the same compounds on the reduction of serum butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE) activity caused by ovariectomy. Female adult Wistar rats were assigned to one of the following groups: sham (submitted to surgery without removal of the ovaries) and ovariectomized. Seven days after surgery, animals were treated for 30 days with a single daily intraperitoneous injection of vitamins E (40 mg/kg) plus C (100 mg/kg) or saline (control). In another set of experiments, the rats were fed for 30 days on a special diet with soy protein or a standard diet with casein (control). Rats were sacrificed after treatments and the hippocampus was dissected and serum was separated. Data demonstrate that vitamins E plus C reversed the activation of Na(+), K(+)-ATPase and AChE in hippocampus of ovariectomized rats. Conversely, soy protein supplementation reversed the increase of AChE activity, but not of Na(+), K(+)-ATPase activity, caused by ovariectomized group. Neither treatment was able to reverse the reduction of serum BuChE activity. Furthermore, treatments with vitamins E plus C or soy were unable to reverse the decrease in estradiol levels caused by ovariectomy. Our findings show that the treatment with vitamins E plus C significantly reversed the effect of ovariectomy on hippocampal Na(+), K(+)-ATPase and AChE activities. However, a soy diet that was rich in isoflavones was able to reverse just the increase of AChE. Neither treatment altered the reduction in serum BuChE activity. Taken together, these vitamins and soy may have a protective role against the possible brain dysfunction observed in some menopause women. Vitamins E plus C and soy isoflavones may be a good alternative as a novel therapeutic strategy.