Modification of glutamatergic synaptic function, a mechanism central to neuronal plasticity, may also mediate long-term drug effects, including dependence and addiction. Benzodiazepine withdrawal results in increased glutamatergic strength, but whether alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA) receptors (AMPARs) are functionally and structurally remodeled during benzodiazepine withdrawal is uncertain. Whole-cell recordings of rat hippocampal CA1 neurons, either acutely dissociated or in hippocampal slices, revealed that AMPAR function was enhanced up to 50% during flurazepam (FZP) withdrawal, without changes in whole-cell channel kinetic properties. Agonist-elicited AMPA currents showed a negative shift in rectification in the presence of spermine, suggesting augmented membrane incorporation of glutamate receptor (GluR) 2-lacking AMPARs. As GluR1-containing AMPARs are critical for activity-dependent alterations in excitatory strength, we sought to determine whether changes in GluR1 subunit distribution in CA1 neurons occurred during benzodiazepine withdrawal. Confocal image analysis revealed that FZP withdrawal promoted GluR1 subunit incorporation into somatic and proximal dendritic membranes of CA1 neurons without GluR2 subunit alterations. Findings of immunoblot studies were consistent with immunofluorescent studies indicating increased GluR1, but not GluR2, subunit protein levels in cytosolic, crude membrane and postsynaptic density-enriched fractions from CA1 minislices. As with long-term potentiation (LTP), the FZP-withdrawal-induced GluR1 incorporation into CA1 neuron membranes may require the GluR1-trafficking protein, synapse-associated protein 97, which was also elevated in membrane-associated fractions. Together, our findings provide evidence that during FZP withdrawal, increased membrane incorporation of GluR1-containing AMPARs and associated up-regulation of AMPAR functions in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons share fundamental similarities with the mechanisms underlying LTP. This implies that glutamatergic neuronal remodeling observed in LTP also subserves physiological adaptations to drug withdrawal.