AIM OF THE STUDY: To report benign epileptiform discharges (BEDs) in the Rolandic region, coexisting in a pediatric patient with intractable localization-related epilepsy, secondary to hippocampal sclerosis. METHODS: We describe the clinical features, MRI, scalp video EEG, magnetoencephalography (MEG) and intracranial video EEG findings, and surgical outcome in a 9-year-old boy with BEDs and intractable complex partial seizures. RESULTS: MRI showed left hippocampal sclerosis. Scalp video EEG interictally demonstrated left temporal spike and sharply contoured slow waves, and right fronto-centro-temporal spike and waves. Ictal scalp video EEG showed left temporal rhythmic sharp waves after the clinical onset of epigastric aura, followed by staring. MEG showed interictal dipoles in the bilateral Rolandic regions with a uniform orientation and right hemispheric predominance. Intracranial video EEG, with bilateral mesial temporal depth and fronto-temporo-parietal strip electrodes, interictally showed polyspikes and slow waves with superimposed low-amplitude fast waves in the left mesial and posterior lateral temporal regions, and spike and waves in the bilateral fronto-parietal regions. Ictal onset was marked by low-amplitude fast waves in the left mesial and posterior lateral temporal regions. He underwent left anterior temporal lobectomy with hippocampectomy. Pathology was hippocampal sclerosis. Predominant right fronto-centro-temporal spike and waves and MEG right Rolandic dipoles persisted after surgery. He was seizure-free 14 months after surgery. CONCLUSION: This is the first report on MEG and intracranial video EEG features of BEDs in the Rolandic region, coexisting with hippocampal sclerosis. Persistence of contralateral benign MEG Rolandic dipoles after surgery indicates that BEDs are coincidental in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. MEG identified Rolandic dipoles, although was unable to localize the deep and focal epileptogenic dipoles from the hippocampal sclerosis.