Present experiments investigate interactions between a rat model of the novelty-seeking phenotype and psychomotor sensitization to nicotine (NIC) in adolescence, and the potential role of hippocampal mossy fibers in mediating the behaviorally-sensitizing effects of NIC. Outbred rats were phenotype-screened as high-responders (HR; locomotor reactivity to novelty score ranking in the upper third of the population) or low-responders (LR; locomotor reactivity to novelty score ranking in the lower third of the population). In Experiment 1, both phenotypes were trained with four NIC injections (at 3-d intervals on postnatal days 33-44), and lidocaine microinfusion was used to temporarily inactivate the hippocampal hilus at each NIC injection. Systemic saline and microinjection of artificial cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) were used as controls. During NIC training, lidocaine inactivation caused augmented locomotor response to NIC in HRs compared to LRs irrespective of injection days. Following 1 week of abstinence, all animals were challenged with a low dose of NIC. During challenge, previously NIC/CSF trained LRs and HRs were divided into two; one half receiving lidocaine inactivation of the hippocampal hilus and the other half receiving CSF control microinjection. Only HRs showed behavioral sensitization to the challenge dose of NIC, which was enhanced with lidocaine inactivation. In Experiment 2, a single NIC exposure was found sufficient to induce sensitization to the challenge dose of NIC in HRs, and concurrently an enlarged supra-pyramidal mossy fiber (SP-MF) terminal field. The increase in the SP-MF volume in HRs was greater with repeated NIC training. In both single and repeated NIC training cases, a significant positive morphobehavioral correlation was observed between challenge NIC-induced locomotion and the SP-MF terminal field volume. These findings suggest that the HR hippocampal mossy fibers are vulnerable to neuroadaptive alterations induced by NIC, which may be a substrate for the observed behavioral vulnerability to NIC.