OBJECTIVE: To study the expressions of BDNF, BDNF mRNA, NGF and NGF mRNA in the permanent focal cerebral ischemia tissues of rats. METHHODS: Healthy male Sprague-Dawley rats were taken for this study project. According to the procedure of Zea-Longa, the rat model with permanent cerebral ischemia was established by rat middle cerebral artery obstructed (MCAO) with a nylon thread, and the model rats of neurobehavioral evaluation as 1-3 grade were randomly divided into two groups: butylphthalide group (A group) and control group (B group). A group was given with 25 mg/kg butylphthalide, B group was given with edible oil, two times every day. 3 days after occlusion, all rats were sacrificed after evaluated the neurobehavioral scores, and the samples of cerebrum were obtained after in situ perfusion and fixation with 40 g/L paraformaldehyde. 5 rats in each group were taken to tetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining for macroscopic observation of cerebral infarction area, the rest samples were processed by immunohistochemistry to evaluate effects of butylphthalide on BDNF and NGF expression, hybridization in situ to evaluate effects of butylphthalide on BDNF mRNA and NGF mRNA expression. SPSS12. 0 for statistical analysis, it was P<0. 05 as having statistical significance. RESULTS: Comparing to control group (B group), butylphthalide group (A group) did not have significantly pathological difference, but the grade of behavior and infarction area were apparently reduced (P<0. 05). In butylphthalide group, there was a significant expression up-regulation to BDNF, NGF, BDNF mRNA and NGF mRNA in the peripheral around infarction and cornu ammonis or hippocampus area (P<0. 05). However in the infarction area, the expressions of BDNF, NGF, BDNF mRNA and NGF mRNA had no significantly statistical difference (P> 0. 05). CONCLUSION: Comparing to control group, butylphthalide can significantly up-regulate the expressions of BDNF and NGF in genetic transcription level, and protect from the ischemia injury.