Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a proinflammatory and depressogenic agent whereas thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH; pGlu-His-Pro-NH2) is an endogenous antidepressant and neuroprotective peptide. LPS and TRH also have opposing effects on K+ channel conductivity. We hypothesized that LPS can modulate the expression and release of not only TRH but also TRH-like peptides with the general structure pGlu-X-Pro-NH2, where "X" can be any amino acid residue. The response might be "homeostatic," that is, LPS might increase TRH and TRH-like peptide release, thereby moderating the cell damaging effects of this bacterial cell wall constituent. On the other hand, LPS might impair the synthesis and release of these neuropeptides, thus facilitating the induction of early response genes, cytokines, and other downstream biochemical changes that contribute to the "sickness syndrome." Sprague-Dawley rats (300 g) received a single intraperitoneal injection of 100 microg/kg LPS. Animals were then decapitated 0, 2, 4, 8, and 24 h later. Serum cytokines and corticosterone peaked 2 h after intraperitoneal LPS along with a transient decrease in serum T3. TRH and TRH-like peptides were measured by a combination of high-performance liquid chromatography and radioimmunoassay. TRH declined in the nucleus accumbens and amygdala in a manner consistent with LPS-accelerated release and degradation. Various TRH-like peptide levels increased at 2 h in the anterior cingulate, hippocampus, striatum, entorhinal cortex, posterior cingulate, and cerebellum, indicating decreased release and clearance of these peptides. These brain regions are part of a neuroimmunomodulatory system that coordinates the behavioral, endocrine, and immune responses to the stresses of sickness, injury, and danger. A sustained rise in TRH levels in pancreatic beta-cells accompanied LPS-impaired insulin secretion. TRH and Leu-TRH in prostate and TRH in epididymis remained elevated 2-24 h after intraperitoneal LPS. We conclude that these endogenous neuroprotective and antidepressant-like peptides both mediate and moderate some of the behavioral and toxic effects of LPS.