The involvement of brain deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) synthesis in adaptive neural events was studied in the adult rat during long-term habituation (LTH) or potentiation (LTP) of the perforant path-granule cell synapse. Male Long-Evans rats were given 50 muCi [3H]thymidine intraventricularly under urethane anesthesia. Soon thereafter, field excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) slope and population spike were monitored from the right dentate gyrus before and at various times (5, 10, 15, 60 min) following the delivery to the ipsilateral perforant bundle of a low frequency (LFS: 1.0 Hz, 160 s) or a high-frequency train (HFS: 400 Hz, 200 ms), repeated once after 5 min. Unstimulated implanted rats served as controls. DNA synthesis was evaluated by the incorporation of the radioactive precursor into DNA of several brain areas at the end of a 1 h incorporation period. In CA1, LTH and LTP increased DNA synthesis by 30% on the stimulated side. In the entorhinal cortex, LTH but not LTP increased DNA synthesis (by 30%) on the stimulated side. Conversely, in the frontal cortex, LTP but not LTH increased DNA synthesis (by 100%) on both sides. Long-lasting changes in synaptic efficacy covaried non-linearly with DNA synthesis in mono- and polysynaptically stimulated hippocampal regions, and in functionally associated neocortical areas. The co-variations of population spike amplitude were positive for LTH and negative for LTP in the dentate gyrus and frontal cortex of both sides, and in CA3/CA1 of the stimulated side, indicating higher DNA synthesis at lower values of LTH and LTP, and viceversa. Further, regional cross-correlation analyses revealed a high degree of synchronization among brain sites, following low- or high-frequency train pulses, indicating that (i) extra-target sites participate on the stimulated and on the contralateral side, and (ii) small distributed changes take place across the sampled neural networks. A modulatory role of information flow on brain DNA synthesis is inferred to take place in a diffuse, distributed manner.