The effects of chronic administration of pentylenetetrazole (PTZ) during early ontogenesis (from postnatal day 14) on the dynamics of age-related changes in electrophysiological characteristics of rat hippocampal slices were studied. Unlike the situation in adult animals, convulsive activity did not develop in rat pups in response to repeated injections. Comparison of the amplitude characteristics of total monosynaptic responses of neurons in hippocampal field CA1 to application of single and paired (separated by 70 msec) stimulation of Schaffer collaterals during the period of maximally intense hippocampal synaptogenesis (at weeks 2-3 of postnatal development) revealed no significant differences between the control group (administration of isotonic saline) and the group given PTZ. The level of suppression of facilitation in paired-pulse stimulation with a short interstimulus interval (15 msec) was significantly less in hippocampal slices from rat pups from the PTZ group. However, as compared with the passive control, the direction of rearrangements in the two experimental group was essentially the same. Nonetheless, regular administration of PTZ during the period of maximally intense hippocampal maturation affected the development of its characteristics. This was not only apparent as a deficiency of inhibitory processes. Increases in the intensity of test stimuli applied to hippocampal slices from PTZ-treated rat pups at 27-48 days of age led to relatively lower response amplitudes as compared with those seen in hippocampal slices from control (given isotonic saline) rats of the same age. The level of facilitation in paired-pulse stimulation with an interstimulus interval of 70 msec showed no difference, decreasing to similar extents in both groups as compared with the passive control group. In addition, hippocampal slices from the PTZ group showed significant decreases in the magnitude of long-term potentiation. Changes occurring in the hippocampus after regular administration of PTZ did not correlate with the development of convulsive activity. The only significant relationship involving the intensity of convulsions was with the increase (compared with the normal for age) in the amplitudes of responses to minimal-intensity test stimuli.