Chronic and acute activation of mu-opioid receptors (MOR) in hippocampal cornu Ammon 1 (CA1) disrupts rhythmic activity, alters activity-dependent synaptic plasticity and impairs spatial memory formation. In CA1, MORs act by hyperpolarizing inhibitory interneurons and suppressing inhibitory synaptic transmission. MOR modulation of inhibitory synaptic function translates into an increase in excitatory activity in all layers of CA1. However, the exact anatomical sites for MOR actions are not completely known. Therefore, we used voltage-sensitive dye imaging, whole cell patch clamping, photolysis of alpha-carboxy-2-nitrobenzyl ester, trifluoroacetic acid salt (CNB) -caged GABA, and micro-sectioned slices of rat hippocampus to investigate the effect of MOR activation in CA1. First, we investigated the effect of MOR activation using a MOR agonist [d-Ala2, NMe-Phe4, Gly-ol5]-enkephalin (DAMGO) on the direct activation of GABA receptors by photolysis of CNB-caged GABA in all layers of CA1. MOR activation did not affect hyperpolarizations due to direct GABA receptor activation in any layer of CA1, but MOR activation did suppress GABAergic inhibitory postsynaptic potentials suggesting that MOR activation acts by presynaptically inhibiting interneuron function. We next examined whether MOR activation was equivalently effective in all anatomical layers of CA1. To do this, cuts were made between anatomical layers of CA1 and isolated layers were stimulated electrically (five pulses at 20 Hz) to produce excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs). Under these conditions, MOR activation significantly increased EPSP areas in stratum radiatum (SR), stratum pyramidale (SP) and stratum oriens (SO) relative to stratum lacunosum-moleculare (SLM). When compared with the effect of GABA(A) and GABA(B) receptor antagonists on EPSP areas, the effect of DAMGO was proportionately larger in SR, SP and SO than in SLM. We conclude that MOR activation is more effective at directly modulating activity in SR, SP and SO, and the smaller effect in SLM is likely due to a smaller MOR inhibition of GABA release in SLM.