This chapter summarizes behavioral and neurochemical data on the delayed effect of locus coeruleus stimulation on learning capabilities in the rat. The initial observation showed that electrical stimulation of the locus coeruleus of a 15-day-old-rat improved the early stages of acquisition and extinction of a food-reinforced task performed 4 weeks later. Neurochemical lesion of the dorsal noradrenergic bundle performed 10 days before the stimulation did not attenuate the behavioral effect, whereas the lesion of the locus coeruleus proper suppressed the subsequent behavioral improvement. More recently we showed that the increase of adrenocorticotrophin release consecutive to a moderate stressful situation was significantly lower in previously stimulated rats than in implanted non-stimulated animals. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the neurochemical lesion of the locus coeruleus increased neophobia in the open-field as well as in a specific exploration task. Taken together these data strongly suggest that the long-term improvement in acquisition and extinction of locus coeruleus-stimulated rats results mainly from an attenuated stress reaction when these animals are confronted with a new environment (beginning of acquisition) or a new situation (beginning of extinction). Finally, we were interested in investigating the possibility of some long-term neurochemical modifications that could be related to the observed behavioral effects. The most significant modification observed concerned certain subpopulations of adrenoceptors in specific brain regions. By using specific ligands of the beta-, alpha 1- and alpha 2-adrenoceptors, we studied the long-term effect (4 weeks) of the locus coeruleus stimulation on the kinetic characteristics of these three sub-types of receptors in four brain areas (the cortex, hippocampus, hypothalamus and brainstem). No significant alteration in the density of beta binding sites was observed in any of the four structures analyzed; likewise locus coeruleus stimulation did not modify the density or affinity of the beta-, alpha 1- and alpha 2-receptors in the brainstem. The density of alpha 1- and alpha 2-receptors was significantly increased in the cortex whereas in the hippocampus only the density of the alpha 2-receptors was increased. Finally, a very large increase of the density of alpha 2-adrenoceptors was observed in the hypothalamus (113%). In each case the increase in receptor density was also associated with a decreased affinity. A behavioral counterpart of these changes in the kinetic properties of the alpha 2-receptors has been observed by using a pharmacological approach.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)