Previous data from our group have provided support for the role of GH, melatonin and estrogens in the prevention of aging of several physiological parameters from bone, liver metabolism, vascular activity, the central nervous system (CNS), the immune system and the skin. In the present work data on the molecular mechanisms involved are presented. A total of 140 male and female rats have been submitted to different treatments over 10 weeks, between 22 and 24 months of age. Males have been treated with GH and melatonin. Females were divided in two groups: intact and castrated at 12 months of age. The first group was treated with GH and melatonin and the second with the two latter compounds and additionally with estradiol and Phytosoya. Aging was associated with a reduction in the number of neurons of the hylus of the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and with a reduction of neurogenesis. GH treatment increased the number of neurons but did not increase neurogenesis thus suggesting a reduction of apoptosis. This was supported by the reduction in nucleosomes and the increase in Bcl2 observed in cerebral homogenates together with an increase in sirtuin2 and a reduction of caspases 9 and 3. Melatonin, estrogen and Phytosoya treatments increased neurogenesis but did not enhance the total number of neurons. Aging induced a significant increase in mitochondrial nitric oxide in the hepatocytes, together with a reduction in the mitochondrial fraction content in cytochrome C and an increase of this compound in the cytosolic fraction. Reductions of glutathione peroxidase and glutathione S-transferase were also detected, thus indicating oxidative stress and possibly apoptosis. Treatment for 2.5 months of old rats with GH and melatonin were able to significantly and favourably affect age-induced deteriorations, thus reducing oxidative damage. Keratinocytes obtained from old rats in primary culture showed an increase in lipoperoxides, caspases 8 and 3 as well as a reduction in Bcl2 leading to enhanced number of nucleosomes that was also restored upon treatments with GH and melatonin. In conclusion, GH and melatonin treatment seem to have beneficial effects against age-induced damage in the CNS the liver and the skin through molecular mechanisms reducing oxidative stress and apoptosis.