Noradrenergic modulation of cortical circuits is involved in information processing, regulation of higher functions, and prevention of epileptic activity. Here, we studied the effects of noradrenaline on the functional connectivity of GABAergic networks of the hippocampus and show that electrical synapses between interneurons are a novel target of noradrenergic modulation in vitro. Application of noradrenaline or of the selective beta-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol decreased gap junction-based coupling in paired recordings from stratum lacunosum-moleculare interneurons by approximately 40%. Similar results were obtained after pharmacological stimulation of the adenylyl cyclase with forskolin. In contrast, the adenylyl cyclase antagonist MDL12330A [cis-N-(2-phenylcyclopentyl)azacyclotridec-1-en-2-amine] or the specific protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor H89 (N-[2-(p-bromocinnamyl-amino)ethyl]-5-isoquinolinesulfonamide dihydrochloride) enhanced the basal strength of coupling by approximately 30%. In addition, PKA-mediated phosphorylation was critical for both isoproterenol- and forskolin-dependent regulation of coupling, because inclusion of the PKA antagonist KT5720 [(9S,10R,12R)-2,3,9,10,11,12-hexahydro-10-hydroxy-9-methyl-1-oxo-9,12-epoxy-1H-di indolo[1,2,3-fg:3',2',1'-kl]pyrrolo[3,4-i][1,6]benzodiazocine-10-carboxylicacid hexyl ester] in the recording pipettes prevented modulation. Lastly, we studied the effects of beta-adrenergic modulation on mixed polysynaptic transmission within the GABAergic network. Isoproterenol depressed propagation of GABA(A) receptor-mediated synaptic currents, but did not change significantly direct GABAergic input, indicating that regulation of electrical coupling adds flexibility to the information flow generated by chemical synapses. In conclusion, activation of beta-adrenergic receptors in stratum lacunosum-moleculare GABAergic networks reduces electrical synaptic transmission via a cAMP/PKA signaling cascade, and affects the degree of synaptic divergence within the circuit. We propose that this dynamic modulation and interplay between electrical and chemical synaptic transmission in GABAergic networks contributes to the tuning of memory processes in vivo, and prevents hypersynchronous activity.