This study was designed to evaluate the effect of repeated morphine treatment on rat behavioral responses. In the genetic section, the mRNA expression of NMDA receptor subunits (NR1 and NR2A) was measured in certain areas of the male rat brain (striatum, prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, hypothalamus and amygdala). In the behavioral section, the effect of repeated morphine treatment on animal models such as locomotion, oral stereotypy, and state-dependent memory in a passive avoidance test was evaluated in the presence or absence of MK801 (NMDA receptor antagonist). Our results showed that chronic morphine treatment, followed by a 7-day (but not 24-hour) washout period, potentiated the effect of test doses of morphine, which is referred to as behavioral sensitization. Meanwhile, pretreatment of animals with MK801 (0.1 and 0.25 mg/kg), 30 min before a test dose of morphine (5 mg/kg), failed to attenuate the locomotion and oral stereotypy in the behavioral sensitization state. Interestingly, a higher dose of MK801 (0.25 mg/kg) decreased memory retrieval induced by morphine (2.5 mg/kg) in state-dependent memory. This effect may be due to the intrinsic motor enhancer property of higher doses of MK801, rather than the blockade of NMDA receptors. It can be concluded that MK801 does not affect morphine-induced behavioral sensitization in the expression phase. In the genetic section of the study, results of quantitative real-time RT-PCR clearly indicated that morphine sensitization increased the expression of NMDA receptor subunits mRNA in the amygdala (NR1 by 104% and NR2A by 85%), while the other areas of the brain were unaffected. Maenwhile, no change in the mRNA levels was observed in non-sensitized animals (chronic morphine treatment followed by a 24-hour washout period). In summary, the present study indicates that repeated morphine treatment followed by long-term (7-day washout) induces behavioral sensitization and causes a delayed increase in mRNA levels of NMDA receptor subunits in the rat amygdala. Meanwhile, it has previously been reported that the amygdala is involved in behavioral sensitization. Thus, it can be concluded that the increase in NMDA receptor expression is associated with morphine-induced behavioral sensitization.