In many patients with drug-resistant partial epilepsy, depth electrode recordings may be required to delineate the best region for cortical resection. We usually implant depth electrodes according to Talairach's stereoelectroencephalography (SEEG) methodology. Using these chronically-implanted depth electrodes, it is possible to generate radiofrequency (RF) thermolesions of the epileptic foci and networks. The advantages of this type of technique are supported by several lines of evidence, in particular, the high number of implanted electrodes makes it possible to generate several thermolesions, whereas the bleeding risk is null, since no additional electrode trajectory is required. Lesions are generated using 100- to 120-mA bipolar current (50V), applied for 10-40s within the epileptogenic zone, as identified by the SEEG recordings. No general or neurological complication occurred during the procedures. Forty-three patients investigated with video-SEEG recordings for presurgical assessment of drug-resistant partial epilepsy were treated using SEEG-guided RF-thermolesions of the epileptic foci between 2001 and 2006, with a follow-up ranging from 12 to 66 months. Three patients were seizure-free and 52% of the patients had a decrease in their seizure frequency of at least 50%. Of the patients presenting a malformation of cortical development etiology (i.e. dysplasia or heterotopia), 70% were classified as responders (at least a 50% decrease in seizure frequency) (p=0.052), whereas the results were less favorable in patients with a cryptogenic and hippocampal sclerosis etiology. Twenty patients underwent conventional cortectomy in a second step, 18 of whom are in Engel class I. In conclusion, SEEG-guided RF-thermolesions of the epileptic foci and networks proved to be a safe therapeutic procedure capable of providing an immediate benefit in terms of seizure control, especially in patients with epilepsy symptomatic of cortical development malformation. Such thermolesions do not preclude subsequent conventional surgery in case of failure, which can be proposed as an alternative procedure if no resective surgery is possible.