There is controversy in the literature in the results of various septal lesions on the sleep-waking cycle (SWC) ultradian structure. Current investigation was aimed to study the effects of interruption of septo-hippocampal cholinergic/GABAergic afferentation on the ultradian structure of SWC and on PS major indices. Experiments were carried out on 12 adult cats, operated under overall anesthesia (Nembutal, 35-40 mg/kg). Three groups of animals were used: I. Implanted sham lesioned control; II. With isolated lesion of medial septal part; III. With combined lesion of medial and lateral septal parts. Lesion was made by passing of direct current. Continuous EEG registration of SWC was lasted 12 hour. Results were evaluated statistically with Student's t test. Isolated lesion of medial septum doesn't produce significant changes of motivational-emotional behavior, but combined lesion of medial and lateral septal parts lead to enhancement of food and water motivation, development of hyper emotionality and hyperactivity. Interruption of septo-hippocampal cholinergic/GABAergic input, increased sleep onset latency, incidence and percentage of active waking (AW) and passive waking (PW) and PS latency but the last effect was dependent from sleep latency change. In the period from appearance of first PS episode to the end of EEG registration PS incidence and percentage wasn't changed significantly. This surgery completely abolished theta rhythm in waking and PS. Combined lesion of medial and lateral septal parts increased sleep latency still more. Total time of AW and PW increased twice. DSWS was significantly decreased. In this case PS latency was also increased still more. PS incidence and total percentage in whole 12 h registration period were reduced substantially, but for the period calculated after appearance of first PS episode until to the end of EEG registration PS mean value was the same as in sham lesioned animals. It is concluded that: 1.Septo-hippocampal cholinergic/GABAergic relationship doesn't play significant role in the triggering mechanisms of SWC ultradian structure; 2. GABAergic part of this input as well as hippocampo-mesodiecephalic descending pathways through the lateral septum have powerful modulatory influence on basic triggering mechanisms of SWS; 3. Development of hippocampal theta rhythm is the only event of PS affected after medial septal lesion; 4. Septo-hippocampal cholinergic input is not essential in triggering mechanisms of PS.