BACKGROUND: Hypoxia-ischemia (H-I) can produce widespread neurodegeneration and deep cerebral white matter injury in the neonate. Resident microglia and invading leukocytes promote lesion progression by releasing reactive oxygen species, proteases and other pro-inflammatory mediators. After injury, expression of the gelatin-degrading matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP-2 and MMP-9, are thought to result in the proteolysis of extracellular matrix (ECM), activation of cytokines/chemokines, and the loss of vascular integrity. Thus, therapies targeting ECM degradation and progressive neuroinflammation may be beneficial in reducing H-I - induced neuropathy. Minocycline has MMP-inhibitory properties and is both anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective. AG3340 (prinomastat) is an MMP inhibitor with high selectivity for the gelatinases. The purpose of this study was to determine whether these compounds could limit H-I--induced injury when administered at a delayed time point. METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to H-I at postnatal day 7 (P7), consisting of unilateral carotid artery ligation followed by 90 min exposure to 8% O2. Minocycline, AG3340, or vehicle were administered once daily for 6 days, beginning 24 hours after insult. Animals were sacrificed at P14 for neurohistological assessments. Immunohistochemistry was performed to determine the degree of reactive astrogliosis and immune cell activation/recruitment. Neural injury was detected using the Fluoro-Jade stain, a marker that identifies degenerating cells. RESULTS: CD11b and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunopositive cells increased in ipsilateral cortex after treatment with vehicle alone, demonstrating microglia/macrophage recruitment and reactive astrogliosis, respectively. Fluoro-Jade staining was markedly increased throughout the fronto-parietal cortex, striatum and hippocampus. Treatment with minocycline or AG3340 inhibited microglia/macrophage recruitment, attenuated astrogliosis and reduced Fluoro-Jade staining when compared to vehicle alone. CONCLUSION: The selective gelatinase inhibitor AG3340 showed equal efficacy in reducing neural injury and dampening neuroinflammation when compared to the anti-inflammatory compound minocycline. Thus, MMP-2 and MMP-9 may be viable therapeutic targets to treat neonatal brain injury.