Fragments containing different cytoarchitectonic fields were dissected out of late embryonic rat hippocampal primordia and transplanted into the hippocampus or septum of adult syngeneic hosts. Field CA3 transplants contained clusters of large, angular (pyramidal) cell bodies surrounded by a radiating corona of dendrites. These cells stained selectively with our monoclonal antibody Py, and a proportion were labelled by [3H]thymidine administered on the 15th day of embryonic life. Field CA1 transplants contained smaller, angular, Py-negative cells, which formed elongated laminae rather than globular clusters. The ability of the host dentate granule cells to project to the transplants was examined by (1) the Timm stain for mossy fibres, (2) electron microscopy of Golgi-impregnated CA3 pyramidal neurons in the transplants, and (3) quantitative electron microscopic assessment of the proportions of large mossy fibre terminals in the synaptic population of the transplants. The Timm stain showed that CA3 transplants received a projection from host dentate granule cells when the transplants were placed in direct contact with the axons in the host mossy fibre pathway. As in the normal host field CA3, the ingrowing mossy fibres terminated selectively on the juxtacellular regions of the dendritic tree and ignored the major part of the dendrites in the radiating corona. The electron micrographs showed that within this territory the host mossy fibres formed synaptic terminals with all the complex features typical of normal mossy fibres, and were presynaptic to complex spines arising from the juxtacellular region of Golgi-impregnated donor CA3 pyramidal cells. The quantitative electron microscopic study demonstrated that the mossy fibre-innervated juxtacellular regions of the field CA3 transplants had up to 20% of the normal density of mossy fibre synapses found in the stratum lucidum of field CA3 in situ. CA3 transplants which were placed in the septum, remote from the host mossy fibres, had either trivial numbers of mossy fibre synapses or none. This confirmed that the abundant mossy fibre terminals in the intrahippocampal CA3 transplants were of host origin, and not due to donor dentate granule cells inadvertently included in the grafts. The selectivity of the host dentate projection for field CA3 transplants was demonstrated by the observation that CA1 transplants in the same locations received only slight mossy fibre projections in the Timm stain, and in electron micrographs their synaptic population had only insignificant numbers of large mossy fibre terminals.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)