The effect of 20 min of ischemia on the cellular and subcellular distribution of glutamate, glutamine and taurine in the rat hippocampus was studied by means of an immunocytochemical procedure based on antisera raised against protein glutaraldehyde conjugates of the respective amino acids. Forebrain ischemia was induced by temporary occlusion of the common carotid arteries in rats with permanently occluded vertebral arteries. Within 90 s after removal of the carotid ligatures, the rats were perfused through the heart with a mixture of glutaraldehyde and paraformaldehyde. For semiquantitative electron microscopic analysis, ultrathin sections were incubated in a primary antiserum followed by a secondary antibody coupled to colloidal gold particles. The gold particle densities over different tissue compartments within the CA1 field and the mossy fiber zone of the hippocampus were determined by means of a specially designed computer program, and values from normal and ischemic animals were compared. It was found that in the astrocytes, the level of immunoreactivity for glutamine and taurine is unchanged or slightly decreased after ischemia, while that for glutamate is increased, particularly within the mitochondria (by about 100%). In contrast, pyramidal cell bodies display a reduced immunolabeling for all three amino acids following the ischemic episode. The results show that ischemia causes a redistribution of glutamate from neurons to glia. The observed increase in the glial immunolabeling for glutamate indicates that the capacity of the glial cells to metabolize glutamate is exceeded during ischemia. This glial response to ischemia has not previously been recognized and may play a role in the chain of events leading to "excitotoxic" cell death during or following an ischemic episode. The reduction of glutamate and taurine immunolabeling in neurons points to a possible amino acid efflux and is compatible with previous biochemical studies demonstrating an elevated extracellular level of these amino acids during ischemia.