Diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP) elicits cholinergic toxicity by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase, leading to accumulation of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine and excessive stimulation of cholinergic receptors throughout the body. Endocannabinoids inhibit the release of neurotransmitters including acetylcholine via a widely distributed retrograde signaling pathway. Endocannabinoid signaling is therefore a potential therapeutic target for the management of OP poisoning. We first evaluated the relative in vitro and in vivo (2.5mg/kg, sc) effects of DFP on cholinesterase, fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH, an endocannabinoid degrading enzyme), monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL, another endocannabinoid degrading enzyme) and cannabinoid receptor (CB1) binding in rat hippocampus. The effects of WIN 55212-2 (cannabinoid receptor agonist, 1.5mg/kg), URB597 (FAAH inhibitor, 3mg/kg), URB602 (MAGL inhibitor, 10mg/kg) or AM404 (endocannabinoid uptake inhibitor, 10mg/kg) on DFP toxicity were then examined. Adult male rats were given either peanut oil or DFP followed immediately by vehicle or one of the four cannabinomimetic drugs. Functional signs of toxicity were evaluated for 24h and then rats were sacrificed for neurochemical measurements. DFP inhibited cholinesterase, FAAH, MAGL and CB1 receptor binding in vitro in a concentration-dependent manner, with highest and lowest potency against cholinesterase and FAAH, respectively. In vivo, DFP inhibited hippocampal cholinesterase (89%) and FAAH (42%), but had no significant effect on MAGL or CB1 binding. Rats treated with DFP alone showed typical signs of cholinergic toxicity including involuntary movements and excessive secretions (SLUD signs). WIN 55212-2, URB597, URB602 and AM404 all significantly reduced involuntary movements following DFP exposure in a time-dependent manner, and most (URB597, URB602 and AM404) also significantly reduced DFP-induced SLUD signs. These results suggest that enhancing endocannabinoid signaling can attenuate the acute toxicity of DFP and provide rationale for further investigations on the role of endocannabinoids in cholinergic toxicity.