We have used laser-capture microdissection and microarray hybridization to characterize gene expression in the three principal neuron layers of rat hippocampus. Correlative and clustering analyses revealed all three layers to be easily differentiated from one another based on gene expression profile alone. A greater disparity in gene expression exists between dentate granule and pyramidal cell layers, reflecting phenotypic and ontological differences between those cell populations. Remarkably, the level of more than 45% of expressed transcripts was significantly different among the three neuron populations, with more than a third of those (>1,000 transcripts) being at least twofold different between layers. Even CA1 and CA3 pyramidal cell layers were dramatically different on a transcriptional level with a separate analysis indicating that nearly 20% of transcripts are differentially expressed between them. Only a small number of transcripts were specific for a given hippocampal cell layer, suggesting that functional differences are more likely secondary to wide-ranging expression differences of modest magnitude rather than very large disparities in a few genes. Categorical analysis of transcript abundance revealed concerted differences in gene expression among the three cell layers referable to specific cellular pathways. For instance, transcripts encoding proteins involved in glucose metabolism are most highly expressed in the CA3 pyramidal layer, which may reflect an underlying greater metabolic rate of these neurons and partially explain their exquisite vulnerability to seizure-induced damage. Conversely, transcripts related to MAP kinase signaling pathways and transcriptional regulator activity are prominent in the dentate granule cell layer, which could contribute to its resistance to damage following seizure activity by positioning these neurons to respond to external stimuli by altering transcription. Taken together, these data suggest that unique physiological characteristics of major cell layers, such as neuronal activity, neuronal plasticity, and vulnerability to neurodegeneration, are reflected in substantial transcriptional heterogeneity within the hippocampus.