In a previous investigation of functional limbic pathways in the human mesial temporal lobe, we found evidence for strong connections between ipsilateral mesial temporal structures, but none for contralateral functional connections (Wilson et al. 1990). In the present study, we focused specifically upon the question of functional commissural linkages between these structures by systematic stimulation of a total of 390 electrode placements in 74 epileptic patients with temporal lobe depth electrodes implanted for surgical diagnosis. Eight standard electrode placement regions were targeted: amygdala, entorhinal cortex, anterior, middle and posterior hippocampus, subicular cortex, middle parahippocampal gyrus, and posterior parahippocampal gyrus. Three to six electrodes were implanted bilaterally in each patient, and each electrode was individually stimulated while recording from all the other sites. Out of the 390 electrodes stimulated, 78% were effective in evoking clear responses in adjacent ipsilateral structures, and 75% of 581 ipsilateral recording sites were responsive to stimulation. Only one of the stimulated electrode sites was effective in evoking responses in contralateral recording sites, and only two of 511 contralateral recording sites were responsive to that stimulation. The effective stimulation site was in presubicular cortex, and the responsive contralateral recording sites were in entorhinal and presubicular cortices. Response to this stimulation site was intermittent and variable in latency. The relative ease of obtaining functional verification of significant ipsilateral anatomical pathways in the human limbic system, and the sharply contrasting difficulty of functionally activating commissural pathways to contralateral limbic sites are discussed in the context of decreases in hippocampal contribution to commissural pathways in the primate brain compared to sub-primate mammals, and the significance of this change to normal limbic system function as well as to mechanisms of seizure spread in epilepsy.