The involvement of the Nuclear distribution element-like (Ndel1; Nudel) protein in the recruitment of the dynein complex is critical for neurodevelopment and potentially important for neuronal disease states. The PDE4 family of phosphodiesterases specifically degrades cAMP, an important second messenger implicated in learning and memory functions. Here we show for the first time that Ndel1 can interact directly with PDE4 family members and that the interaction of Ndel1 with the PDE4D3 isoform is uniquely disrupted by elevation of intracellular cAMP levels. While all long PDE4 isoforms are subject to stimulatory PKA phosphorylation within their conserved regulatory UCR1 domain, specificity for release of PDE4D3 is conferred due to the PKA-dependent phosphorylation of Ser13 within the isoform-specific, unique amino-terminal domain of PDE4D3. Scanning peptide array analyses identify a common region on Ndel1 for PDE4 binding and an additional region that is unique to PDE4D3. The common site lies within the stutter region that links the second coiled-coil region to the unstable third coiled-coil regions of Ndel1. The additional binding region unique to PDE4D3 penetrates into the start of the third coiled-coil region that can undergo tail-to-tail interactions between Ndel1 dimers to form a 4 helix bundle. We demonstrate Ndel1 self-interaction in living cells using a BRET approach with luciferase- and GFP-tagged forms of Ndel1. BRET assessed Ndel1-Ndel1 self-interaction is amplified through the binding of PDE4 isoforms. For PDE4D3 this effect is ablated upon elevation of intracellular cAMP due to PKA-mediated phosphorylation at Ser13, while the potentiating effects of PDE4B1 and PDE4D5 are resistant to cAMP elevation. PDE4D long isoforms and Ndel1 show a similar sub-cellular distribution in hippocampus and cortex and locate to post-synaptic densities. We show that Ndel1 sequesters EPAC, but not PKA, in order to form a cAMP signalling complex. We propose that a key function of the Ndel1 signalling scaffold is to signal through cAMP by sequestering EPAC, whose activity may thus be specifically regulated by sequestered PDE4 that also stabilizes Ndel1-Ndel1 self-interaction. In the case of PDE4D3, its association with Ndel1 is dynamically regulated by PKA input through its ability to phosphorylate Ser13 in the unique N-terminal region of this isoform, triggering the specific release of PDE4D3 from Ndel1 when cAMP levels are elevated. We propose that Ser13 may act as a redistribution trigger in PDE4D3, allowing it to dynamically re-shape cAMP gradients in distinct intracellular locales upon its phosphorylation by PKA.