Rat adult hippocampal progenitor cells (AHPCs) are self-renewing, multipotent neural progenitors that have the ability to differentiate into neurons and glia. Previously, we demonstrated that coculture of AHPCs with postnatal day 2, type 1 cortical astrocytes on laminin-coated micropatterned polymer substrates facilitates selective neuronal differentiation of the AHPCs (Recknor et al., Biomaterials 2006;27:4098-4108). Under this condition, multidimensional cell-cell and/or cell-extracellular matrix interactions, as well as possible soluble factors released from astrocytes provided spatial and temporal control selectively enhancing neuronal differentiation and neurite alignment on topographically different regions of the same substrate. To investigate the potential role of astrocyte-derived soluble factors as cues involved in neuronal differentiation, a noncontact coculture system was used. Under control conditions, approximately 14% of the AHPCs were immunoreactive (IR) for the neuronal marker, class III beta-tubulin (TUJ1-IR). When cocultured in physical contact with astrocytes, neuronal differentiation increased significantly to about 25%, consistent with our previous results. Moreover, under noncontact coculture conditions using Transwell insert cultures, neuronal differentiation was dramatically increased to approximately 64%. Furthermore, neurite outgrowth from neuronal cell bodies was considerably greater on the patterned substrate when compared with the nonpatterned planar substrate under noncontact coculture conditions. Taken together, our results demonstrate that astrocyte-derived soluble factors provide cues for specific neuronal differentiation of AHPCs cultured on micropatterned substrates. In addition, a suppressive influence on neuronal differentiation appears to be mediated by contact with cocultured astrocytes. These results provide important insights into mechanisms for controlling neural progenitor/stem cell differentiation and facilitate development of strategies for CNS repair.