Stress-related psychopathology is particularly prevalent in women, although the neurobiological reason(s) for this are unclear. Dopamine (DA) and serotonin (5-HT) systems however, are known to play important adaptive roles in stress and emotion regulation. The aims of the present study included examination of sex differences in stress-related behaviour and neuroendocrine function as well as post mortem neurochemistry, with the main hypothesis that corticolimbic DA and 5-HT systems would show greater functional activity in males than females. Long-Evans rats of both sexes were employed. Additional factors incorporated included differential postnatal experience (handled vs. nonhandled) and adult mild stress experience (acute vs. repeated (5) restraint). Regional neurochemistry measures were conducted separately for left and right hemispheres. Behaviourally, females showed more exploratory behaviour than males in the elevated plus maze and an openfield/holeboard apparatus. Females also exhibited significantly higher levels of adrenocorticotrophic hormone and corticosterone at all time points in response to restraint stress than males across treatment conditions, although both sexes showed similar habituation in stress-induced ACTH activation with repeated mild stress. Neurochemically, females had significantly higher levels of DA (in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), insular cortex and n. accumbens) and 5-HT (in vmPFC, amygdala, dorsal hippocampus and insula) than males. In contrast, males had higher levels of the DA metabolite DOPAC or DOPAC/DA ratios than females in all five regions and higher levels of the 5-HT metabolite 5-HIAA or 5-HIAA/5-HT ratios in vmPFC, amygdala and insula, suggesting greater neurotransmitter utilization in males. Moreover, handling treatment induced a significant male-specific upregulation of 5-HT metabolism in all regions except n. accumbens. Given the adaptive role of 5-HT and DAergic neurotransmission in stress and emotion regulation, the intrinsic sex differences we report in the functional status of these systems across conditions, may be highly relevant to the differential vulnerability to disorders of stress and emotion regulation.