INTRODUCTION: Pure progressive amnesia, a form of progressive focal cortical atrophy is thought to represent the early stages of a rare form of Alzheimer's disease (AD). This syndrome is characterized by the insidious and slowly progressive breakdown of memory, in the absence of a significant impairment in other cognitive domains or in the realm of behavior. The aims of the present study were to contribute to the characterization of this poorly documented type of amnesia, to compare it with other forms of amnestic syndromes resulting from lesions to the medial temporal lobes and to discuss its potential pathophysiological basis. PATIENTS AND METHOD: We carried out three single case studies in patients presenting with pure progressive amnesia. They all underwent a neuropsychological evaluation that included an extensive assessment of spatial and recognition memory, along with brain magnetic resonance imaging and a cerebral blood flow study. RESULTS: All three patients had a severe deficit in the storage of context-free information, along with a severe visual recognition memory impairment, as previously reported in a case study on a patient with pure progressive amnesia (Cognitive Neuropsychology 23 (2006) 1230-1247). Yet, spatial memory remained well preserved, and patients maintained totally independent in everyday life. In addition, a significant atrophy of the medial temporal structures was found. DISCUSSION: This specific pattern of impairment differs from other types of amnestic syndromes after medial temporal damage and raises the question of lesional topography, as well as possible compensatory phenomena. We suggest that pure progressive amnesia results from selective damage to the ventral subhippocampal route into the hippocampal formation leading to impaired context-free memory. Spatial memory may remain intact because the dorsal parahippocampal route into the hippocampus remains functional. Pure progressive amnesia may contribute to a better understanding of the neural systems involved in declarative memory and provide a better understanding into the nature of the memory impairment that characterizes the initial stages of AD.