OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of salidroside-pretreatment on changes of neuroethology in rats with global cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury so as to investigate its probable mechanism. METHODS: Sixty SD male rats were randomly divided into sham-operated group, untreated group and salidroside-pretreated group. The rats in salidroside-pretreated group were intraperitoneally administered with salidroside for seven days. The dose of salidroside was 12 mg/(kg.d). Thirty minutes after the last administration, the acute global cerebral ischemia-reperfusion in rats of the untreated group and the salidroside-pretreated group was induced by using the modified Pulsinelli's 4-vessel occlusion method. Five rats in each group were killed to obtain their brains 24 hours after reperfusion. The water content in the right brain was measured by calculating the ratio of dry weight to wet weight of the right brain. Activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and content of malondialdehyde (MDA) in hippocampus of the rats were measured. Then neurological severity scores (NSSs) of the other 15 rats in each group were observed respectively before and 6, 12, 24, 48 and 96 h after reperfusion. At the fifth day after reperfusion, the test of Morris water maze was carried out to examine the memories and learning abilities of the rats. RESULTS: The content of MDA, the activity of SOD, the NSS, the mean incubation period and the ratio of time in the second quadrant in the untreated group were significant different from those in the sham-operated group (P<0.05). Compared with the untreated group, the brain water content, the content of MDA and the NSS degraded, and the mean incubation period shortened in salidroside-pretreated group. The activity of SOD and the ratio of residence time in the second quadrant increased in salidroside-pretreated group as compared with the untreated group (P<0.05). CONCLUSION: Salidroside can reduce the degree of cerebral edema of rats with global cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury, relieve the metabolism abnormity of free radical and improve the function of cognition.