Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) is a potent survival factor for motor neurons in animals, and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta) is suspected to play roles in apoptosis and tau phosphorylation. Here we report the immunological expression of IGF-I, GSK-3beta, phosphorylated-GSK-3alpha/beta (p-GSK-3alpha/beta) and phosphorylated-tau in the spinal cord and hippocampus of Kii and Guam amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients. Sixteen ALS patients (10 Japanese sporadic, 3 Kii and 3 Guam ALS) and 14 neurological controls (10 Japanese and 4 Guamanian) were examined. The immunoreactivity for each antibody was rated by the percentages of positive neurons to total anterior horn neurons in each patient and was analyzed statistically. Many normal-looking neurons from Japanese sporadic ALS, Kii ALS and Guam ALS patients, as well as from Japanese and Guam controls, were positive for anti-IGF-I antibody. A positive correlation between IR scores for anti-IGF-I antibody and clinical durations of Japanese sporadic ALS patients was found in this study (P < 0.0001). This suggested that IGF-I might have a protective effect against ALS degeneration. In Japanese sporadic ALS patients, abnormal as well as normal-looking neurons showed significant high IR scores for anti-GSK-3beta antibody than those of controls. Anterior horn neurons from Guam and Kii ALS patients characteristically showed weak staining for anti-GSK-3beta antibody but were markedly positive for anti-pGSK-3alpha/beta antibody compared to those from both Japanese controls and Japanese sporadic ALS patients, and showed the co-localization of IGF-I and p-GSK-3alpha/beta. This suggested that the IGF-I signaling pathway in Guam and Kii ALS patients might function to phosphorylate GSK-3beta to protect neurons from ALS degeneration. Neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the hippocampus and spinal cord from Kii and Guam ALS patients showed the co-localization of PHF-tau and p-GSK-3alpha/beta by a confocal laser scanning technique. The predominant expression of p-GSK-3alpha/beta compared to GSK-3beta in spinal motor neurons and the co-localization of p-GSK-3alpha/beta and PHF-tau in NFT-laden neurons in the hippocampus and spinal cord were characteristic findings of Kii and Guam ALS patients.