Microgravity is known to produce a number of neurological disturbances during space flight; however, the underlying mechanism of these disturbances is yet to be elucidated. There have been some reports about the increased oxidative stress under microgravity or simulated microgravity. In the present study, we investigated the process of oxidative stress induced by simulated microgravity in different areas of rat brain, which may shed light on the mechanism of neurological disturbances and further neuroprotective research in spaceflight. After adaption for 7 d, 40 healthy male Sprague-Dawley rats were matched for body weight and randomly assigned to control groups (7, 14, 21 and 28 d) and tail-suspended simulated microgravity groups (7, 14, 21 and 28 d). The tail-suspended groups were treated with 30 angels of tail suspension and the control groups were treated similarly to the tail-suspended groups but without tail suspension. After the required times, different structures of rat brain, including cerebellum, cerebral cortex and hippocampus, were harvested and frozen for the further determination. Griess assay, thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS) assay, competitive ELISA and ferric reducing ability of plasma (FRAP) assay were used for the observation of the changes of reactive nitrogen species (RNS), malondialdehyde (MDA), nitrotyrosine (NT) and total antioxidant capacity (TAC), respectively. As shown in the results, there were different changes in various brain regions after tail suspension compared with control groups. (1) In cerebellum, NT increased after 7 d tail suspension, decreased after 14 d and increased again after 28 d; MDA increased after 14 d; RNS increased and TAC decreased after tail suspension for 21 d; (2) Increase of NT after14 d tail suspension, increase of MDA and decrease of TAC after 21 d were found in cerebral cortex; (3) In hippocampus, RNS increased after tail suspension for 7 d, decreased after 14 d and increased again after 28 d; MDA increased after 21 d; NT increased after 28 d; TAC increased after 7 d and recovered after 21 d. These results suggest that simulated microgravity induced by tail suspension increases the level of oxidative stress in rat brain; however, there are different features in different areas of rat brain. During the response to simulated microgravity, rat brain tissues present a similar process from adaptive response to irreversible oxidative damage.