It is firmly established that women experience major depression (MD) at roughly twice the rate of men and that dysregulation of the immune system is associated with the appearance and course of this condition. In the present study, we sought to identify whether "sickness behavior", an inflammatory model of MD, is characterized by sexual dimorphism by focusing on both neurochemical and behavioral responses. Therefore, we investigated the serotonergic and dopaminergic activity of various brain regions implicated in the pathophysiology of affective disorders (hypothalamus, hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, amygdala and striatum) in response to a mild lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge, in rats of both sexes. According to our results, at 2 h post-LPS administration (100 microg/kg i.p.), the neurochemical substrate was primarily altered in female rats with the serotonergic function being markedly enhanced in all brain regions examined. Dopaminergic activation following immune system sensitization with LPS was not apparent in male rats and only modest in female rats with the exception of striatum. LPS administration also affected sickness-associated behaviors to a different extent in male and female rats, as assessed in the forced swim test (FST), the hot plate test (HPT) and the open-field arena. LPS-treated female rats coped better with the stressful FST procedure, as evidenced by an increase in swimming duration. The effects of LPS treatment appeared to be more robust in male rats, as far as suppression of locomotor activity is concerned, while the antinociceptive properties of LPS were evident in both sexes though showing sex-dependent kinetics. Moreover, when traditional measures of sickness (i.e. sucrose consumption, social exploration, food intake) were assessed, males and females appeared to be similarly affected, except for food intake. These data are the first to demonstrate that the serotonergic system is affected to a greater extent in female rats at 2 h post-LPS administration and further contribute to our understanding regarding sexual dimorphism upon sickness establishment.