Initially, trans activation responsive region (TAR)-DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) was considered to be a disease-specific component of ubiquitin-positive and tau-negative inclusions in the brains of patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS); however, it is now widely known that this protein also abnormally accumulates in neurons in other neurodegenerative diseases. On the basis of observation mainly in the medial temporal lobe, TDP-43-immunoreactive neuronal inclusions have been detected in 20-30% of Alzheimer disease (AD) brains. However, it is controversial whether these cases represent a combined disease, that is, mixed AD/FTLD-U. To address this issue, it is necessary to obtain more knowledge on the region-specific distribution of TDP-43 immunoreactivity and also about its relationship to AD common pathology. Here, we describe abnormal TDP-43 immunoreactivity in the medial temporal lobe in 5/16 AD patients (31%). Most of the depositions were cytoplasmic inclusions, mainly located in the subiculum and parahippocampal gyrus and rarely in dentate granular cells of the hippocampus. TDP-43-positive inclusions and senile plaque/neurofibrillary tangle distribution were not always identical, and intracellular colocalizations of TDP-43 and phospho-tau were also infrequent. The cases showing TDP-43-positive inclusions in the medial temporal lobe also showed abnormally highly dense TDP-43 immunoreactivity in the frontal, but not in the parietal and occipital cortices. Intracellularly, TDP-43-positive inclusions were highly ubiquitinated and colocalized with p62 immunoreactivity as well. Our findings suggest that abnormal TDP-43 deposition and AD pathology (formation of senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles) might occur independently. However, taken together with the results of previous reports, the distribution of TDP-43 immunoreactivity in the hippocampus and frontal cortex in AD appear to be varying. We consider that it is still too early to determine that the TDP-43 accumulation is a part of AD pathology or result from a completely independent pathology.