OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protein levels of phospho-ERK and phospho-APE/Ref-1 in hippocampal neurons after global cerebral ischemia reperfusion in rats, and observe the relationship between transmembrane signal transduction and repair of DNA damage. The role of ERK signal transduction pathway following global cerebral ischemia reperfusion in rats is further discussed. METHODS: Ninety healthy male SD rats were divided into 3 groups randomly: Sham group (S group), Ischemia reperfusion group (IR group) and Pd98059 pretreatment/ischemia reperfusion group (PD group). Global cerebral ischemia reperfusion model was established by four-vessel occlusion (4-VO) method, and reperfusion was performed 5 minutes following ischemia. Protein levels of phospho-ERK and phospho-APE/Ref-1 were detected using immunohistochemical method at 2 h, 6 h, 12 h, 24 h, 48 h and 72 h after reperfusion, and neuron apoptosis was observed by HE and TUNEL staining. RESULTS: In CA1 region of IR group, TUNEL positive cells began to appear at 6 h after IR, and reached the apex during 24 h to 48 h. However, TUNEL positive was most strongly exhibited in PD group. In IR group, phospho-ERK was obviously detected in CA3 region at 2 h after IR, and its level was gradually decreased from 6 h until totally absent at 48 h. Besides, phospho-ERK expression in PD group was weaker than that in IR group. For phospho-APE/Ref-1, its expression began to appear in CA1 region in IR group at 2 h after IR, with no obvious changes during 2 h to 12 h. Phospho-APE/Ref-1 expression began to decrease at 24 h and this decrease continued thereafter. Expression level of phospho-APE/Ref-1 in PD group was lower than that in IR group. Results showed the concurrence of decreased phospho-ERK expression level and increased neuron apoptosis after cerebral ischemia reperfusion, the former of which was consistent with the decrease of phospho-APE/Ref-1 expression. Also, the greater the inhibition of ERK phosphorylation was, the greater decrease of APE/Ref-1 expression occurred. CONCLUSION: Activation of ERK signal transduction pathway increased the expression of phospho-APE/Ref-1, and thus faciliated the repair of DNA damage. So, activation of ERK signal transduction pathway may protect neurons from apoptosis after cerebral ischemia reperfusion.