Antidepressant action may involve stimulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). BDNF also regulates long-term potentiation (LTP). We hypothesized that the 5-HT and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, venlafaxine, would stimulate BDNF expression and alter LTP more effectively than the selective 5-HT reuptake inhibitor, citalopram. To test this, we administered venlafaxine or citalopram to rats for 1 or 3 weeks; control rats received vehicle only. We measured BDNF protein in hippocampal and frontal cortex homogenates, and serum. We assessed LTP in area cornu ammonis region 1 (CA1) of in vitro hippocampal brain slices. We also examined input/output function to determine if basal synaptic transmission in area CA1 was altered. Compared to vehicle control, frontal cortex BDNF protein was significantly greater after three, but not one, weeks of venlafaxine treatment. In contrast, citalopram (1 or 3 weeks) did not stimulate BDNF. The stimulatory effect of venlafaxine treatment on BDNF was superimposed on a general time-dependent decrease in expression which was seen in both vehicle control and citalopram-treated animals. LTP was significantly impaired in slices from venlafaxine-treated rats after both 1 and 3 weeks of treatment, but LTP appeared normal in slices from citalopram-treated and vehicle control rats. The LTP impairment caused by venlafaxine treatment was independent of changes in BDNF: LTP was impaired after only 1 week of treatment, prior to any effect on BDNF, and LTP magnitude was not correlated with BDNF protein concentration. Input/output function was significantly but equally reduced after 3 weeks of citalopram, venlafaxine, or control treatment. Decreased BDNF protein in citalopram and vehicle control animals, and decreased input/output function may be consequences of individual housing of animals, which we used to ensure proper dosing. Venlafaxine stimulation of BDNF and inhibition of LTP may be related to the reported effectiveness of venlafaxine in treatment of depression.