Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) is a multi-modal hematopoietic growth factor, which also has profound effects on the diseased CNS. G-CSF has been shown to enhance recovery from neurologic deficits in rodent models of ischemia. G-CSF appears to facilitate neuroplastic changes by both mobilization of bone marrow-derived cells and by its direct actions on CNS cells. The overall objective of the study was to determine if G-CSF administration in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease (AD) (Tg APP/PS1) would impact hippocampal-dependent learning by modifying the underlying disease pathology. A course of s.c. administration of G-CSF for a period of less than three weeks significantly improved cognitive performance, decreased beta-amyloid deposition in hippocampus and entorhinal cortex and augmented total microglial activity. Additionally, G-CSF reduced systemic inflammation indicated by suppression of the production or activity of major pro-inflammatory cytokines in plasma. Improved cognition in AD mice was associated with increased synaptophysin immunostaining in hippocampal CA1 and CA3 regions and augmented neurogenesis, evidenced by increased numbers of calretinin-expressing cells in dentate gyrus. Given that G-CSF is already utilized clinically to safely stimulate hematopoietic stem cell production, these basic research findings will be readily translated into clinical trials to reverse or forestall the progression of dementia in AD. The primary objective of the present study was to determine whether a short course of G-CSF administration would have an impact on the pathological hallmark of AD, the age-dependent accumulation of A beta deposits, in a transgenic mouse model of AD (APP+ PS1; Tg). A second objective was to determine whether such treatment would impact cognitive performance in a hippocampal-dependent memory paradigm. To explain the G-CSF triggered amyloid reduction and associated reversal of cognitive impairment, several mechanisms of action were explored. (1) G-CSF was hypothesized to increase activation of resident microglia and to increase mobilization of marrow-derived microglia. The effect of G-CSF on microglial activation was examined by quantitative measurements of total microglial burden. To determine if G-CSF increased trafficking of marrow-derived microglia into brain, bone marrow-derived green fluorescent protein-expressing (GFP+) microglia were visualized in the brains of chimeric AD mice. (2) To assess the role of immune-modulation in mediating G-CSF effects, a panel of cytokines was measured in both plasma and brain. (3) To test the hypothesis that reduction of A beta deposits can affect synaptic area, quantitative measurement of synaptophysin immunoreactivity in hippocampal CA1 and CA3 sectors was undertaken. (4) To learn whether enhanced hippocampal neurogenesis was induced by G-CSF treatment, numbers of calretinin-expressing cells were determined in dentate gyrus.