The effects of short-term serotonin (5-HT) depletion by p-chlorophenylalanine (PCPA) on the firing activity of dorsal raphe nucleus 5-HT neurons, on the responsiveness of dorsal hippocampus pyramidal neurons to microiontophoretically applied 5-HT and on the efficacy of the electrical stimulation of the ascending 5-HT pathway in suppressing the firing activity of CA3 dorsal hippocampus pyramidal neurons were assessed in chloral hydrate-anesthetized rats. PCPA (250 mg/kg/day i.p. for 2 days) reduced the 5-HT content of the dorsal hippocampus by 90%. However, the number of spontaneously active 5-HT neurons per microelectrode trajectory through the dorsal raphe or their average rate of firing was unaltered. The effect of afferent 5-HT pathway stimulation was reduced in only 40% of treated rats, whereas the sensitivity of CA3 pyramidal neurons to microiontophoretic 5-HT was not modified. The function of the terminal 5-HT autoreceptor was assessed using methiothepin, an autoreceptor antagonist. Methiothepin (1 mg/kg, i.v.) significantly enhanced the efficacy of the stimulation in PCPA-treated rats, although the degree of enhancement was much less than in controls. A greater reduction of the effectiveness of the stimulation was obtained by increasing the dose of PCPA (350 mg/kg/day i.p. for 2 days). This regimen reduced the 5-HT content of the dorsal hippocampus by 95%. In these rats, the sensitivity of the terminal 5-HT autoreceptor was assessed by increasing the frequency of the stimulation from 1 to 5 Hz. This procedure reduced to a similar extent the efficacy of the stimulation in treated and control rats, suggesting that the reduced effectiveness of methiothepin in enhancing 5-HT synaptic transmission in PCPA-treated rats is due to a lower degree of activation of the terminal 5-HT autoreceptor. The present results showing that the 350 mg/kg/day regimen of PCPA, but not the 250 mg/kg/day regimen, reduced the efficacy of the stimulation of the ascending 5-HT pathway suggest that a greater than 90% depletion is required to affect 5-HT neurotransmission significantly. The reduced level of activation of terminal 5-HT autoreceptors in rats treated with the lower dose of PCPA may facilitate the release of the remaining 5-HT per stimulation-triggered action potential, ensuring a virtually unaltered synaptic efficacy.