Rett syndrome is a progressive neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) gene. Previous reports have revealed serotonergic function to be altered in the medullas of patients with Rett syndrome and in an animal model of the disease. However, it has remained unclear whether a genetic loss of MeCP2 disrupts serotonergic innervation to the forebrain. In this study, we measured levels of monoamines by high-performance liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection in selected regions of the forebrains of Mecp2-null mice (Mecp2-/y) and wild-type mice (Mecp2+/y) on postnatal day (P) 14, P28, P42 and P56. The levels of hippocampal serotonin (5-HT) and its main metabolite, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), were significantly lower in Mecp2-null mice than in age-matched wild-type mice on P28, P42 and P56. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a loss of 5-HT-immunoreactive fibers in the Mecp2-null hippocampus on P56. By contrast, in the raphe region of Mecp2-null mice, there were significant decreases in 5-HT and noradrenaline levels, but these differences later disappeared and there was no change in the number of 5-HT-immunoreactive neuronal cell bodies. Furthermore, we conducted an experiment comparing HPLC measurements in presymptomatic heterozygous females (Mecp2+/-) and wild-type female littermates (Mecp2+/+) on P56. Significant decreases in hippocampal 5-HT and 5-HIAA contents in Mecp2-heterozygous mice were revealed, and these were not accompanied by changes in 5-HT or noradrenaline contents in the raphe region. Therefore, these results indicated decreases in serotonergic innervation to the hippocampus in Mecp2-null males and Mecp2 heterozygous females. We speculate that disturbances in serotonergic neurotransmission in the hippocampus may be linked to the behavioral abnormalities seen in Rett syndrome, such as increased anxiety-like behaviors and reduced exploratory locomotion. MeCP2 may be required for stable serotonergic homeostasis and serotonergic innervation to the hippocampus during postnatal development.