Retrograde synaptic signaling by endogenous cannabinoids (endocannabinoids) is a recently discovered form of neuromodulation in various brain regions. In hippocampus, it is well known that endocannabinoids suppress presynaptic inhibitory neurotransmitter release in CA1 region. However, endocannabinoid signaling in CA3 region remains to be examined. Here we investigated whether presynaptic inhibition can be caused by activation of postsynaptic group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) and following presynaptic cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1 receptor) using mechanically dissociated rat hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons with adherent functional synaptic boutons. Application of group I mGluR agonist (RS)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG) reversibly suppressed spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs). In the presence of tetrodotoxin (TTX), frequency of miniature IPSCs was significantly reduced by DHPG, while there were no significant changes in minimum quantal size and sensitivity of postsynaptic GABA(A) receptors to the GABA(A) receptor agonist muscimol, indicating that this suppression was caused by a decrease in GABA release from presynaptic nerve terminals. Application of CB1 synthetic agonist WIN55212-2 (mesylate(R)-(+)-[2,3-dihydro-5-methyl-3-[4-morpholino)methyl]pyrrolo-[1,2,3-de]- 1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl](1-naphthyl)methanone) or endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol also suppressed the spontaneous IPSC. The inhibitory effect of DHPG on spontaneous IPSCs was abolished by SR-141716 (5-(4-chlorophenyl)-1-(2,4-dichloro-phenyl)-4-methyl-N-(piperidin-1-yl)-1H-pyrazo le-3-carboxamide), a CB1 receptor antagonist. Furthermore, postsynaptic application of GDP-betaS blocked the DHPG-induced inhibition of spontaneous IPSCs, indicating the involvement of endcannabinoid-mediated retrograde synaptic signaling. These results provide solid evidence for retrograde signaling from postsynaptic group I mGluRs to presynaptic CB1 receptors, which induces presynaptic inhibition of GABA release in rat hippocampal CA3 region.