Intracellular fatty acid (FA) chaperones known as FA-binding proteins (FABPs) are a group of molecules known to participate in cellular metabolic processes such as lipid storage, membrane synthesis, and beta-oxidation or to coordinate transcriptional programs. However, their role in adult neurogenesis still remains obscure. The FABPs expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) are heart-type (FABP3), epidermal-type (FABP5), and brain-type (FABP7). These three FABPs possess a differential affinity for polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). Recently, we reported that GPR40, a receptor for free FAs and particularly for PUFAs, is expressed in the CNS of adult monkeys and upregulated after transient global brain ischemia in the hippocampal subgranular zone (SGZ), a neurogenic niche in adulthood. The SGZ showed a peak proliferation of progenitor cells and maximal expression of GPR40 during the second week after ischemia. As both FABPs and GPR40 might be closely related to the adult neurogenesis, here, we studied the expression of FABP 3, 5, and 7 in the SGZ, comparing normal and postischemic adult monkeys. Immunoblotting revealed that FABP5 and FABP7, but not FABP3, were significantly increased on day 15 after ischemia when compared with the nonischemic control. Immunohistochemistry showed that FABP5 was almost undetectable in the control SGZ but was abundant on day 15 after ischemia. FABP 3, 5, and 7 were expressed in S-100beta-positive astrocytes and nestin-positive neural progenitors. However, only FABP 5 and 7 were found in bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)-positive newly generated cells. FABPs were most frequently coexpressed with the S-100beta-positive astrocytes, whereas betaIII-tubulin-or polysialylated neural cell-adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM)-positive newborn neurons in the vicinity of the astrocytes expressed none of the three FABPs. These results support a role of astrocyte- and/or neural progenitor-derived FABPs as components of the molecular machine regulating the progenitor cell niche in the adult primate brain.