The use dependence of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) and their underlying conductances was studied in area CA1 of the hippocampal brain slice preparation, using a two-pulse paradigm in which paired activation of two separate synaptic inputs resulted in changes in the second, or "primed" response. In intracellular current-clamp recordings, the "primed" response, normally triphasic, exhibited a larger, wider excitatory PSP (EPSP) component and greatly reduced or absent IPSP components. Maximal widening occurred when the interval between synaptic stimuli was between 200 and 250 msec. Hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic cell reversed both the early IPSP and the direction of change of the width of the "primed" EPSP response, suggesting that the changes in the "primed" waveform were not due to the addition of an unidentified inward current(s). Furthermore, the reduction of the IPSPs during the "primed" response could not be accounted for by the fact that the membrane potential of the postsynaptic cell was hyperpolarized and therefore closer to IPSP reversal potential. Using single-electrode voltage-clamp techniques, we found that the early inhibitory conductance generally decreased by approximately 50%, with little if any change in reversal potential. The late inhibitory conductance also showed a priming-induced decrease of approximately 95%. Finally, "primed" four-pulse bursts of stimuli induced a larger depolarization in the postsynaptic cell than did unprimed bursts, also with an optimal interval of about 250 msec. We conclude that activation of certain synaptic pathways in the hippocampus results in a temporal window of 200-300 msec during which inhibitory synaptic activity is depressed and excitatory synaptic transmission is maximally effective, especially if the excitation occurs in short bursts. Such a mechanism would endow the inhibitory synaptic components of the hippocampus with a "gating" function to control long-term synaptic modification at excitatory synapses in the same region.