OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of Naoerkang (NEK), a compound traditional Chinese herbal medicine, on the expressions of beta-amyloid peptide 1-42 (Abeta(1-42)) and neprilysin (NEP) in hippocampal tissues in a rat model of Alzheimer's disease (AD). METHODS: Forty-eight male SD rats were randomly divided into normal control group, untreated group, piracetam group, low-dose NEK group, medium-dose NEK group, and high-dose NEK group, with 8 rats in each group. Five microliters of Abeta(1-42) (2 microg/microL) were injected into CA1 area of hippocampus in rat to establish AD model whereas the normal control rats were injected with same volume of normal saline for comparison. The rats in the NEK groups were treated respectively with high-, medium- and low-dose [60, 30, 15 g/(kg.d)] NEK for 28 days consecutively; piracetam [0.375 g/(kg.d)] was intragastrically administered to rats in the piracetam group; and normal saline was applied in the control and untreated groups. Y-maze test was used for behavioral study to test the learning and memory abilities of rats in different groups. The expressions of Abeta(1-42) and NEP in hippocampus were determined by immunohistochemical method, and the results were analyzed by image acquisition and analysis system. RESULTS: Injection of Abeta(1-42) could induce learning and memory dysfunction and up-regulate Abeta(1-42) expression in hippocampal tissue in rats of the untreated group. Compared with the normal control group, the abilities of learning and memory of rats in the untreated group were significantly decreased (P<0.01) and the expression of Abeta(1-42) was significantly increased (P<0.01) after model establishment. After 28-day administration of NEK and piracetam, the abilities of learning and memory of AD rats in piracetam and low-dose, medium-dose and high-dose NEK groups were significantly improved as compared with the untreated group (P<0.01 or P<0.05); the expression of Abeta(1-42) in hippocampal tissues was decreased (P<0.01 or P<0.05) and the expression of NEP was increased (P<0.01 or P<0.05), especially in the high-dose NEK group. CONCLUSION: NEK can play the role of anti-dementia by increasing the expression of NEP in hippocampal tissues of AD rats so as to reduce the quantity of AAbeta(1-42) and by improving the ability of learning and memory of rats with AD.