Glutamate is the main excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, while gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is a primary inhibitory neuromodulator. Both amino acids act through ionotropic and metabotropic receptors that are widely distributed in the central nervous system. There are at least eight subtypes of metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGlu), which have been divided into three groups (mGlu I, II, and III). The mGlu7 receptor subtype, which belongs to the mGlu III group, seems to play a special role, as it is abundant in brain structures that are known to be responsible for antidepressant and/or anxiolytic activity of drugs. In GABAergic neurons, GABA is synthesised from glutamate by the pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD). It is expressed as two major isoforms, GAD65 and GAD67, responsible for the synthesis of the vesicular and cytoplasmic pool of neurotransmitter, respectively. Moreover, GABAergic neurons express a variety of proteins such as reelin, involved in synaptic transmission and plasticity. The aim of our study was to investigate the regulation of GABA synthesis and the level of modulatory receptor for GABA in mice lacking mGlu7 receptor for glutamate. The levels of GAD mRNA, GADs, and reelin proteins in the hippocampi of mGlu7-/- and mGlu7-/+ mice were measured using in situ hybridisation, immunohistochemistry, and Western blotting (WB). GAD mRNAs in the CA and DG regions of the hippocampus were measured separately. The levels of GAD65, GAD67, and reelin proteins were determined in the homogenates using WB, and the number of stained neurons was estimated using a stereological method of counting. GABA(B) receptor level was measured using a radioligand binding assay. Our results show that the mRNA and protein levels of both GADs were decreased in the hippocampi of animals lacking the mGlu7 receptor. Decreased levels of GAD67 mRNA were found in both the CA and DG regions, while the decrease in GAD65 mRNA was observed mainly in the CA region of the hippocampus. The protein levels of GAD65 was lowered in mGlu7-/- animals only, while GAD67 and GABA(B) receptor number were decreased in both mGlu7+/- and mGlu7-/- mice when measured in the whole hippocampus. In contrast, reelin was shown to be increased both in mGlu7-/+ and mGlu7-/- mice. The results suggest that mGlu7 receptor is involved in the regulation of GABAergic system activity at the level of GABA synthesised enzymes, specific proteins expressed by GABAergic neurons and metabotropic receptor for GABA.