OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) on Calbindin D28 K(CB) expression and apoptosis in hippocampus in hyperlipemia rats with concomitant cerebral ischemia (CI). METHODS: Forty male SD rats were randomized into control, hyperlipemia+ CI (model), acupuncture I, and acupuncture II groups, with 10 cases in each. Hyperlipemia model was established by feeding the animals with high fat forage for 6 weeks and CI model established by occlusion of the unilateral middle cerebral artery. For rats of acupuncture I group, EA (1-3 mA, 15 Hz) was applied to bilateral "Sanyinjiao" (SP 6) and "Fenglong" (ST 40) for 20 min every time, once daily for 10 days before CI. For rats of both acupuncture I and II groups, after CI, EA was applied to SP 6, ST 40, "Baihui" (GV 20) and "Shuigou" (GV 26) were punctured with filiform needles and stimulated by twirled the needle with hand continuously for 1 min, once daily for 7 days. The apoptotic cells of hippocampal CA 3 area were displayed by TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase biotin-dUTP nick end labeling) method. CB antibody staining with immunohistochemistry was used to show CB-positive cells which were observed by optic microscope. RESULTS: In comparison with control group, the percentage of apoptotic cells of the hippocampal CA 3 area in model group increased considerably (P < 0.01), while the number of CB immunoreaction (IR)-positive cells in the same area decreased significantly (P < 0.05). Compared with model group, the percentages of apoptotic cells of CA 3 area in acupuncture I and acupuncture II groups lowered remarkably (P < 0.01), while the numbers of CB IR-positive cells in the later two groups increased significantly (P < 0.01). The therapeutic effect of acupuncture I group was apparently superior to that of acupuncture II group in lowering the percentage of apoptotic cells and upregulating CB IR-positive cell number (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Acupuncture can effectively lessen neuronal apoptosis of the hippocampus CA 3 area which may be closely related to its effect in upregulating the expression of CB in hyperlipemia + CI rats. Moreover, the cerebral ischemia injury degree may be lightened by acupuncture-lowering hyperlipemia first.