Sleep fragmentation (SF) is prevalent in human sleep-related disorders. In rats, sustained SF has a potent suppressive effect on adult hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) neurogenesis. Adult-generated DG neurons progressively mature over several weeks, and participate in certain hippocampal-dependent cognitive functions. We predicted that suppression of neurogenesis by sustained SF would affect hippocampal-dependent cognitive functions in the time window when new neurons would reach functional maturity. Sprague-Dawley rats were surgically-prepared with electroencephalogram (EEG) and electromyogram (EMG) electrodes for sleep state detection. We induced sleep-dependent SF for 12 days, and compared SF animals to yoked sleep fragmentation controls (SFC), treadmill controls (TC) and cage controls (CC). Rats were injected with bromodeoxyuridine on treatment days 4 and 5. Rats were returned to home cages for 14 days. Cognitive performance was assessed in a Barnes maze with 5 days at a constant escape position followed by 2 days at a rotated position. After Barnes maze testing rats were perfused and DG sections were immunolabeled for BrdU and neuronal nuclear antigen (NeuN), a marker of mature neurons.SF reduced BrdU-labeled cell counts by 32% compared to SFC and TC groups. SF reduced sleep epoch duration, but amounts of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep did not differ between SF and SFC rats, and non-rapid eye movement (NREM) was reduced only transiently. In the Barnes maze, SF rats exhibited a progressive decrease in escape time, but were slower than controls. SF animals used different search strategies. The use of a random, non-spatial search strategy was significantly elevated in SF compared to the SFC, TC and CC groups. The use of random search strategies was negatively correlated with NREM sleep bout length during SF. Sustained sleep fragmentation reduced DG neurogenesis and induced use of a non-spatial search strategy, which could be seen 2 weeks after terminating the SF treatment. The reduction in neurogenesis induced by sleep fragmentation is likely to underlie the delayed changes in cognitive function.