Although strong positive association between alcoholism and depression is a common epidemiological observance, the causal relationship and the neurobiological substrates of such observations are far from clear. We have reported that chronic daily exposure to a relatively high dose of alcohol in rats can induce or exacerbate an already existing depressive-like behavior (Pharm Biochem Behav 91:97-103, 2008). Moreover, these effects of alcohol were blocked by pretreatment with desipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant, implicating a role for the biogenic amines in this type of depressive symptoms. In order to further delineate the involvement of specific neurotransmitters in alcohol-induced depressive symptoms, we examined the concentrations of norepinephrine (NE), dopamine (DA) and serotonin (5-HT) in the frontal cortex and hippocampus following alcohol administration as well as pretreatment with two antidepressants, nomifensine and imipramine selective NE/DA and NE/5-HT uptake inhibitors, respectively. Adult female Wistar and Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats were exposed to alcohol via inhalation chambers (3h/day for 10 days) to achieve daily blood alcohol concentration of approximately 150 mg%. On day 11, the animals were evaluated for general locomotor activity (LCA) and performance in the forced swim test (FST), followed by neurochemical analyses. As expected WKY rats had lower LCA and higher immobility in the FST compared to Wistar rats. WKY rats also had lower levels of all three biogenic amines compared to Wistar rats in both areas. However, only cortical NE was reduced in both strains following alcohol administration. Treatments with nomifensine and imipramine blocked the behavioral and most of the neurochemical deficits caused by alcohol in both strains. These results implicate cortical NE as a major player in alcohol-induced depression. Moreover, it is suggested that selective NE uptake inhibitors may be of particular therapeutic potential in co-morbid condition of alcoholism and depression.