Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells are the most significant source of reelin, an extracellular matrix glycoprotein essential for cortical development. Strategically located in the marginal zone, CR cells control radial migration and laminar positioning of pyramidal neurons of the cortical plate. They degenerate and undergo cell death when cortical migration is completed. In human cortex development, reelin-expressing CR cells are already present in the early preplate, and continue to increase in number after the appearance of the cortical plate. In the course of the first half of gestation, the reelin signal in the marginal zone undergoes a huge amplification in parallel with the growth of the cortical plate and the expansion of the cortical surface. A significant source of CR cells is the cortical hem, a putative signalling centre at the interface of the prospective hippocampus and the choroid plexus. Hem-derived CR cells co-express reelin and p73, a transcription factor of the p53-family. They form the predominant CR cell population of the human neocortex. Characteristically, CR cells express the anti-apoptotic isoform DeltaNp73 which may be responsible for the protracted lifespan of human CR cells and the morphological differentiation of their axonal plexus. This dense fibre plexus, absent in lower mammals, amplifies the reelin-signal and establishes a physical boundary between the cortical plate and the marginal zone. In this review, we analyze the multiple sources of reelin/p73 positive CR cells at the interface of various telencephalic centres and the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricles. Additional populations of CR cells may derive from the thalamic eminence in the ventral thalamus and from the strionuclear neuroepithelium, or 'amygdalar hem'. Comparative studies in a variety of species indicate that the cortical hem is the main origin of CR cells destined for the neocortex, and is most highly developed in the human brain. The close association between cortical hem and choroid plexus suggests a concerted role in the evolutionary increase of CR cells, amplification of the reelin signal in the marginal zone, and cortical expansion.