Vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT2) is present in brain monoaminergic neurons and is responsible for collecting neurotransmitters (dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin) from the cytoplasm and storing them in vesicles for synaptic release (1). VMAT2 is therefore an essential regulator of monoaminergic neuronal function. In the brain, VMAT2 is highly present in the striatum, hypothalamus, substantia nigra, and hippocampus, with low levels in cerebellum and occipital cortex (2). In the striatum, greater 95% of VMAT2 is associated with dopaminergic neurons (3). Decreases in the VMAT2 level are implicated in movement disorders, such as Parkinson's disease (PD), Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Huntington disease (HD). VMAT2 is highly expressed by beta cells of the endocrine pancreas and not in exocrine pancreas. VMAT2 is expressed mainly on the beta-cells in the islets of Langerhans and composed of 1-2% of the pancreatic mass. beta-cell mass (BCM) is a useful indicator of the function of the pancreas. In type I diabetes, beta-cells are destroyed leading to a dramatic decrease in BCM. In type II diabetes, there is a slow and insidious decrease in BCM because of peripheral insulin resistance and increase demand for insulin. Decreases in BCM in the human and monkey pancreases correlate to the decreases in insulin level in the blood. VMAT2 is a potential target for non-invasive assessment of BCM and pancreatic function. VMAT2 has been studied in vivo by positron emission tomography (PET) using [(11)C]dihydrotetrabenazine (2-hydroxy-3-isobutyl-9-[(11)C]methoxy-10-methoxy-1,2,3,4,6,7,-hexahydro-11bH-bez o[alpha]-quinolizine) ([(11)C]DTBZ) with selective VMAT2 binding activity in neurons of the brain and pancreas . Binding of DTBZ to the vesicular monoamine transporter is stereospecific (4). The (+)-enantiomer showed a high affinity in vitro binding (Ki = 0.97 +/- 0.48 nM) for the VMAT2 in rat brain striatum, whereas the (-)-enantiomer was inactive (Ki = 2.2 +/- 0.3 muM). [(11)C]DTBZ has been developed as a PET agent for the non-invasive study of VMAT2 in the human brain.