There are two subtypes of cannabinoid receptors in mammalian tissues: CB1 and CB2 (1, 2). CB1 receptors are expressed abundantly in neuronal terminals in the central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral tissues to inhibit neurotransmitter release. CB1 receptors are found predominately in the striatum, hippocampus, substantia nigra, globus pallidus, and cerebellum. CB2 receptors are present mainly on immune cells to modulate cytokine release. Both receptor subtypes are coupled through Gi/o proteins to inhibit adenylate cyclase and to modulate potassium and calcium channels. CB1 receptors have been demonstrated to be involved in analgesia, regulation of food intake, and control of movement in normal subjects (3). Alteration of CB1 receptor function has been implicated in a number of human diseases such as depression, schizophrenia, and obesity (4-6). Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is a major active cannabinoid that is found in marijuana and activates CB1 receptors (7). THC has a very high lipophilicity (log P, 7), which causes imaging studies that use radiolabeled THC to be unsuccessful because of high nonspecific binding in the brain and slow brain entry. However, high lipophilicity is essential for binding to CB1 receptors, and moderate lipophilicity is required for crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Existing radiolabeled ligands are mainly analogs of the antagonist rimonabant (SR141716A) and the agonist WIN 55,212-2; however, these ligands also exhibit high nonspecific binding, which limits their application in imaging (8). Therefore, there is a need to lower the lipophilicity of the radioligands with little effect on binding affinity and ability to cross the BBB. N-(Morpholin-4-yl)-5-(4-iodophenyl)-1-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-4-methyl-1H-pyrazole-3 -carboxamide (AM281) is a potent and selective CB1 antagonist with nanomolar affinity and lower lipophilicity than its analog, SR141716A. N-(Morpholin-4-yl)-5-(4-[(123)I]iodophenyl)-1-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-4-methyl-1H-py razole-3-carboxamide ([(123)I]AM281) is being developed as a single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) agent for the non-invasive study of CB1 receptors in the brain (9, 10).