BACKGROUND: Traumatic brain injury (TBI), a major cause of morbidity and mortality, is a serious public health concern. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of mild hypothermia on gene expression in the hippocampus and to try to elucidate molecular mechanisms of hypothermic neuroprotection after TBI. METHODS: Rats were subjected to mild hypothermia (group 1: n = 3, 33 degrees C, 3H) or normothermia (group 2: n = 3; 37 degrees C, 3H) after TBI. Six genome arrays were applied to detect the gene expression profiles of ipsilateral hippocampus. Functional clustering and gene ontology analysis were then carried out. Another 20 rats were randomly assigned to 4 groups (n = 5 per group): group 3, sham-normothermia; group 4, sham-hypothermia; group 5, TBI-normothermia; and group 6, TBI-hypothermia. Real-time fluorescent quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction was used to detect specific selected genes. RESULTS: We found that 133 transcripts in the hypothermia group were statistically different from those in the normothermia group, including 57 transcripts that were upregulated and 76 that were downregulated after TBI (P < .01). Most of these genes were involved in various pathophysiological processes, and some were critical to cell survival. Analysis showed that 9 gene ontology categories were significantly affected by hypothermia, including the most affected categories: synapse organization and biogenesis (upregulated) and regulation of inflammatory response (downregulated). The mRNA expression of Ank3, Cmbp, Nrxn3, Tgm2, and Fcgr3 was regulated by hypothermia, TBI, or a combination of TBI and hypothermia compared with the sham-normothermia group. Their mRNA expression was significantly regulated by hypothermia in TBI groups. CONCLUSION: Posttraumatic mild hypothermia has a significant effect on the gene expression profiles of the hippocampus, especially those genes belonging to the 9 gene ontology categories. Differential expression of those genes may be involved in the most fundamental molecular mechanisms of cerebral protection by mild hypothermia after TBI.