Phencyclidine (PCP) is a psychotomimetic drug that induces schizophrenia-like symptoms in healthy individuals and behavioral abnormalities with corresponding symptoms of schizophrenia in non-human animals. Our previous studies showed that systemically administered PCP produces tonic activation of neurons in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) of rats and that this activation is mainly via excitatory inputs from regions outside the mPFC. Such long-lasting activation of PFC neurons is now considered to be a pivotal factor in PCP-induced behavioral abnormalities. Although our previous study identified the ventral hippocampus as a possible source of the excitatory inputs, it is not the only source innervating the mPFC. Several regions such as the thalamus also have monosynaptic projections to the mPFC. Recently, increased c-fos expression by systemic PCP administration was reported in the mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus (MD) and the centromedial nucleus of the thalamus (CM), which have strong reciprocal innervations with the mPFC. However, few studies have reported effects of PCP on the firing activity of MD/CM neurons in unanesthetized animals. In the current study in freely moving rats, we examined effects of systemically administered PCP on the spontaneous firing activity of the MD/CM, after identifying the response properties of recorded neurons in social interaction with an unfamiliar partner. About 30% of MD/CM neurons recorded exhibited tonic excitation following systemic PCP administration, whereas only a few neurons (7%) were inhibited by PCP. The proportion of MD neurons activated by systemic PCP administration was about half of that in the mPFC. Although the proportion of neurons responsive to social interaction did not differ between the two regions (40%), neurons activated during social interaction in the mPFC (90%) were more likely to be affected by systemic PCP administration than those in the MD/CM (45%). These results suggest that neurons responsive to social interaction in the mPFC may be differently affected by PCP than those in the MD/CM.