The consolidation theory of long-term memory (e.g., Squire, 1992) predicts that damage to the medial temporal lobes will result in temporally graded retrograde memory loss, with a disproportionate impairment of recent relative to remote knowledge; in contrast, severe atrophy of the temporal neocortex is predicted to result in the reverse temporally graded pattern, with a selective sparing of recent memory (K.S. Graham & Hodges, 1997). Previously, we reported evidence that autobiographical episodic memory does not follow this temporal pattern (Westmacott, Leach, Freedman, & Moscovitch, 2001). In the present study, we found evidence suggesting that semantic memory loss does follow the predicted temporal pattern. We used a set of tasks that tap implicit and explicit memory for famous names and English vocabulary terms from across the 20th century. KC, a person with medial temporal amnesia, consistently demonstrated across tasks a selective deficit for famous names and vocabulary terms from the 5-year period just prior to injury; this deficit was particularly profound for elaborated semantic knowledge (e.g., word definitions, occupation of famous person). However, when asked to guess on unfamiliar items, KC's performance for names and words from this 5-year time period increased substantially, suggesting that he retains some of this knowledge at an implicit or rudimentary level. Conversely, EL, a semantic dementia patient with temporal neocortical atrophy and relative sparing of the medial temporal lobe, demonstrated a selective sparing of names and words from the most recent time period. However, this selective sparing of recent semantic memory was demonstrated in the implicit tasks only; performance on explicit tasks suggested an equally severe impairment of semantics across all time periods. Unlike the data from our previous study of autobiographical episodic memory, these findings are consistent with the predictions both of consolidation theory (Hodges & Graham, 1998; Squire, 1992) and multiple trace theory (Nadel & Moscovitch, 1999) that the hippocampus plays a timelimited role in the acquisition and representation of long-term semantic memories. Moreover, our findings suggest that tasks requiring minimal verbal production and explicit recall may provide a more sensitive and comprehensive assessment of intact memory capacity in brain-damaged individuals.