Neurological and locomotor clinical signs are described in animals infected with Trypanosoma evansi. These disturbances may be related to changes in the amount of acetylcholine (neurotransmitter) in the synaptic cleft. Therefore, changes in acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity and lipid peroxidation in brain and spinal cord of T. evansi-infected rats were investigated. Each rat was intraperitoneally infected with 10(6) trypomastigotes kept in fresh (group A; n=13) and cryopreserved blood (group B; n=13). Thirteen served as uninfected (not-infected; group C). In days 4 and 30 post-infection (PI) the rats were anesthetized and subsequently decapitated to obtain the brain and the spinal cord (between vertebrae L1 and S2). The brain was removed and dissected (cerebellum, cerebral cortex, striatum and hippocampus) to measure the activity of AChE and lipid peroxidation, determined by TBARS levels. To verify if T. evansi was present in the central nervous system (CNS), brain structures of three rats of each group were processed by PCR T. evansi-specific. AChE activity was significantly increased in all brain structures and decrease in spinal cord in infected rats in 4 PI (P<0.05). The levels of TBARS were decreased in the brain structures, differently from spinal cord, which showed increased lipid peroxidation in 4 PI. The AChE activity in striatum, cerebral cortex, hippocampus and spinal cord reduced concomitantly with the increase of the enzyme in cerebellum of the infected rats (P<0.05), and the TBARS levels increased in cerebellum, striatum and spinal cord of infected rats compared to non-infected animals in 30 PI. The PCR was positive for T. evansi in all structures of the brain, confirming the presence of the parasite in the CNS. Based on the results, we conclude that the changes in AChE activity and lipid peroxidation in the CNS are induced by infection with T. evansi, suggesting that the parasite interferes with the cholinergic neurotransmission in this experimental condition.