Benzodiazepine site agonists (such as diazepam) are well-known to impair cognition. Since benzodiazepines exert their effects via modulation of alpha1-, alpha2-, alpha3- and alpha5-containing GABA(A) receptors, the cognition-impairing effects of diazepam must be associated with one or several of these subtypes. Of these different subtypes, alpha5-containing GABA(A) receptors represent an attractive option as the "cognition" subtype based upon the preferential localization of these receptors within the hippocampus and the well-established role of the hippocampus in learning and memory. As a result, it is hypothesized that an inverse agonist selective for the alpha5 subtype should enhance cognition. For example, L-655708, a partial inverse agonist with 50-100-fold higher affinity for the alpha5 relative to the alpha1, alpha2 and alpha3 subtypes of GABA(A) receptors, enhanced cognitive performance in rats. Unfortunately, however, pharmacokinetic properties of this compound prevented it being developed further. In order to try achieve binding selectivity in a series structurally distinct from the imidazobenzodiazepines, the group at Merck, Sharp & Dohme commenced studies within the triazolopyridazine series. Although a degree of binding selectivity could be achieved (a maximum of 22-125-fold for alpha5 versus alpha1, alpha2 or alpha3) this approach was dropped in favour of a strategy to identify compounds with either a combination of selective affinity and selective efficacy or purely selective efficacy. With respect to the former, screening of the Merck chemical collection identified a novel, moderately alpha5-binding selective thiophene series and further optimization of this series produced MRK-536, which demonstrated a modest alpha5 binding selectivity (~10-fold) as well as alpha5-efficacy selectivity. However, the structure-activity relationship within this and the analogous tetralone series proved unpredictable and these series were not pursued further. The success of the selective efficacy approach on the alpha2/alpha3-selective agonist project led a similar paradigm being adopted for the alpha5 project. The starting point for this strategy was the triazolopyridazine 3 which, like MRK-536, possessed a degree of both alpha5 binding- and efficacy-selectivity. By changing the core from a triazolopyridazine to a triazolophthalazine structure, alpha5 binding selectivity was lost but with subsequent optimization, compounds with the desired profile (low or antagonist efficacy at the alpha1, alpha2 and alpha3 subtypes and marked inverse agonism at alpha5-containing receptors) could be achieved, allowing the clinical candidate alpha5IA as well as the structurally-related pharmacological tool compound alpha5IA-II to be identified. By appending features of the prototypic alpha2/alpha3-selective triazolopyridazine L-838417 (t-butyl and 1,2,4 triazole) along with the isoxazole of alpha5IA to a pyrazolotriazine core, an additional clinical candidate, MRK-016, was identified. Finally, a degree of alpha5 efficacy selectivity was achieved the pyridazine series but metabolic instability within this chemotype limited its further optimization. Overall, these studies demonstrate the feasibility of adopting a selective efficacy approach in the identification of alpha5 selective GABA(A) receptor inverse agonists.