INTRODUCTION: Several studies have assessed the impact of surgery on both anterograde and remote memory in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). The majority of results have shown an extensive memory deficit in patients after temporal resection (TL). However, few protocols have used a prospective longitudinal design. Moreover, the postoperative delays were variable from one study to the next, instead of regular monitoring to identify the potential effect of time elapsed after surgery on memory performance. In addition, some studies have not used strict inclusion criteria to establish homogeneous patient groups. Finally, the impact of surgery on memory has been often assessed by comparing memory skills between epileptic patients and healthy controls. Our aim was to examine the impact of TL on memory in patients with TLE, recruited according to clear-cut clinical criteria. Moreover, we focused on memory performance progression per se in epileptic patients pre- and postoperatively, rather than on memory performance analysis expressed as "deficient" or "normal". METHODS: We assessed 30 patients with unilateral TLE (17 right TLE and 13 left TLE) on four anterograde memory tests and six remote memory tasks. Patients completed all tests preoperatively, and 5 and 12 months after TL. RESULTS: Five months after surgery, performance was equivalent to the preoperative scores for both groups in anterograde memory tasks and remote memory tests. One year after TL, patients with right TLE showed enhanced performance in the verbal anterograde memory tests and in retrieving recent autobiographical memories. Results for left TL showed improved scores only in a recognition memory test of faces. CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, surgical patients were "double winners" gaining seizure freedom and potential of memory stability or recovery. The gain was observed only 12 months after surgery and following temporal resection lateralisation. Our data showed postoperative memory improvement in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy presenting with specific clinical characteristics.