Phenobarbital produces its anti-epileptic actions by increasing the inhibitory drive of gamma-aminobutyric acid. However, following recurrent seizures, gamma-aminobutyric acid excites neurons because of a persistent increase of chloride raising the important issue of whether phenobarbital could aggravate persistent seizures. Here we compared the actions of phenobarbital on initial and established ictal-like events in an in vitro model of mirror focus. Using the in vitro three-compartment chamber preparation with the two hippocampi and their commissural fibres placed in three different chambers, kainate was applied to one hippocampus and phenobarbital contralaterally, either after one ictal-like event or after many recurrent ictal-like events that produce an epileptogenic mirror focus. Field, perforated patch and single-channel recordings were used to determine the effects of gamma-aminobutyric acid and their modulation by phenobarbital, and alterations of the chloride cotransporters were investigated using sodium-potassium-chloride cotransporter 1 and potassium chloride cotransporter 2 antagonists, potassium chloride cotransporter 2 immunocytochemistry and sodium-potassium-chloride cotransporter 1 knockouts. Phenobarbital reduced initial ictal-like events and prevented the formation of a mirror focus when applied from the start. In contrast, phenobarbital aggravated epileptiform activities when applied after many ictal-like events by enhancing the excitatory actions of gamma-aminobutyric acid due to increased chloride. The accumulation of chloride and the excitatory actions of gamma-aminobutyric acid in mirror foci neurons are mediated by the sodium-potassium-chloride cotransporter 1 chloride importer and by downregulation and internalization of the chloride-exporter potassium-chloride cotransporter 2. Finally, concomitant applications of the sodium-potassium-chloride cotransporter 1 antagonist bumetanide and phenobarbital decreased excitatory actions of gamma-aminobutyric acid and prevented its paradoxical actions on mirror focus. Therefore, the history of seizures prior to phenobarbital applications determines its effects and rapid treatment of severe potentially epileptogenic-neonatal seizures is recommended to prevent secondary epileptogenesis associated with potassium chloride cotransporter 2 downregulation and acquisition of the excitatory gamma-aminobutyric acid phenotype.