Fenfluramine is an amphetamine derivative that in humans is used primarily as an anorectic agent in the treatment of obesity. In rats, subchronic high-dose d,l-fenfluramine treatment (24 mg/kg subcutaneously, twice daily for 4 days) causes long-lasting decreases in brain serotonin (5HT), its metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, and high-affinity 5HT uptake sites. Moreover, this high-dose treatment regimen causes both selective long-lasting decreases in fine-caliber 5HT-immunoreactive axons and appearance of other 5HT-immunoreactive axons with morphology characteristic of degenerating axons. Determination of the potential neurotoxic effects of fenfluramine treatment using immunohistochemistry is limited from the perspectives that staining is difficult to quantify and that it relies on presence of the antigen (in this case 5HT), and the 5HT-depleting effects of fenfluramine are well known. In the present study, we used quantitative in vitro autoradiography to assess, in detail, the density and regional distribution of [3H]paroxetine-labeled 5HT and [3H]mazindol-labeled catecholamine uptake sites in response to the high-dose fenfluramine treatment described above. Because monoamine uptake sites are concentrated on monoamine-containing nerve terminals, decreases in uptake site density would provide a quantitative assessment of potential neurotoxicity resulting from this fenfluramine treatment regimen. Marked decreases in densities of [3H]paroxetine-labeled 5HT uptake sites occurred in brain regions in which fenfluramine treatment decreased the density of 5HT-like immunostaining when compared to saline-treated control rats. These included cerebral cortex, caudate putamen, hippocampus, thalamus, and medial hypothalamus. Smaller, but nonetheless significant, decreases in density of [3H]paroxetine-labeled 5HT uptake sites were noted in brain regions in which partial sparing of 5HT-like immunoreactive fibers had been reported following fenfluramine treatment, specifically septum, lateral hypothalamus, and amygdala. In contrast, [3H]mazindol autoradiography revealed that total catecholamine (i.e., dopamine and norepinephrine) uptake sites in cerebral cortex, caudate putamen, and locus coeruleus, areas in which [3H]paroxetine-labeled 5HT uptake sites were significantly decreased, were unaffected by this fenfluramine treatment. These data support the hypothesis that subchronic, high-dose fenfluramine treatment causes selective degeneration of 5HT axons in rat brain. Since pharmacokinetic studies show that the dosing regimen used in this study exposes rat brain to concentrations of fenfluramine that are approximately 600 times greater than those resulting from the therapeutic oral dose, caution must be exercised in extrapolating these data to humans.