The effects of thyroid hormone deficiency on the noradrenergic innervation of hippocampus from locus coeruleus (LC) were examined using intraocular double transplants in albino rats. Fetal brainstem pieces containing the nucleus LC were transplanted to the anterior chamber of the eye of thyroidectomized and normal recipients and the brain grafts were allowed to mature for 8 weeks. Pieces of fetal hippocampal formation were introduced into the anterior eye chamber and placed in contact with the LC grafts or placed in previously operated eyes. As evidenced by high performance liquid chromatography, hippocampal transplants in contact with a brainstem graft gradually became hyperinnervated by noradrenergic fibers from these grafts. The levels of norepinephrine were lower in single control grafts and in double grafts in thyroidectomized animals than in control double grafts. Extracellular recordings of single neuronal activity were performed in hippocampal transplants in all 3 groups after 10-14 months in oculo. Superfusion with the alpha2- adrenergic agonist clonidine and the alpha-adrenergic antagonist phentolamine elicited significant increases in discharge rate of hippocampal neurons in control double transplants, but not in single hippocampal grafts or in double grafts in thyroidectomized hosts. The beta-adrenergic antagonist timolol did not change the neuronal firing rate in any of the 3 groups. Superfusion with penicillin over single hippocampal transplants caused long-lasting increases in slow-wave activity. This increased bioelectric activity remained after the cessation of drug application. A similar increase in slow-wave activity was found in hyperinnervated control double transplants only when penicillin was combined with clonidine or phentolamine. However, the hippocampal portion of double grafts in thyroidectomized recipients readily responded to penicillin with seizures and/or interictal spiking. The data presented here suggest that chronic lack of thyroid hormones leads to significant disturbances of the central noradrenergic transmission in isolated LC-hippocampal circuits.