In situ hybridization histochemistry was used to localize and quantify the effects of acute and repeated immobilization stress on mRNA levels of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) in catecholaminergic neurons in the locus ceruleus and substantia nigra and on mRNA levels of relevant markers of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, namely corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN), proopiomelanocortin in the pituitary, and mineralocorticoid receptors (MR, type I) and glucocorticoid receptors (GR, type II) in the hippocampus, PVN and pituitary. Control, acutely stressed (1 x lMO, sacrificed immediately after 2 h of immobilization), and repeatedly stressed (6 x IMO plus delay, sacrificed 24 h after 6 daily 2-h immobilizations and 6 x lMO plus challenge, sacrificed immediately after the seventh daily 2-h immobilization) male Sprague-Dawley rats were examined. TH mRNA expression was increased in the locus ceruleus in the acutely stressed and repeatedly stressed animals. The increase in TH mRNA levels was greatest in the repeatedly stressed (6 x IMO plus challenge) group. TH mRNA levels were not altered in the substantia nigra. CRH mRNA levels in the PVN were significantly increased in the three stressed groups and the increase was greatest in the 6 x IMO plus challenge group. CRH mRNA levels were increased in the central nucleus of the amygdala only after acute stress. Proopiomelanocortin mRNA levels were elevated in the anterior pituitary during acute and repeated stress, but the magnitude of the effect was largest after acute stress. The changes in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis were accompanied by an acute stress-induced increase in MR mRNA levels in the hippocampus, MR and GR mRNA levels in the PVN and GR mRNA levels in the pituitary. MR mRNA levels continued to be elevated in the PVN in the 6 x IMO plus challenge animals. Plasma corticosterone levels were elevated in the acute and repeated stress conditions. The results show that repeated immobilization stress produces a rapid and persistent increase in mRNA expression of TH in the locus ceruleus, CRH in the PVN, and proopiomelanocortin in the anterior pituitary. The TH-containing neurons in the locus ceruleus and the CRH-containing neurons in the PVN appear to preserve the capability to respond to repeated stimulation (6 x IMO plus challenge) indicating altered feedback mechanisms under repeated stress conditions. GR and MR mRNA levels are differentially regulated in the hippocampus, PVN and pituitary by acute and repeated stress. It is of interest that the central nervous system systems which are activated during repeated stress, namely the locus ceruleus-norepinephrine system and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, are dysregulated in melancholic depression. Further studies of the central nervous system effects of prolonged exposure to stress may help elucidate the mechanisms underlying dysregulation of the locus ceruleus-norepinephrine system and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in depression and other stress-related psychiatric diseases.