Activation of Group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) in rat hippocampus induces a form of long-term depression (LTD) that is dependent on protein synthesis. However, the intracellular mechanisms leading to the initiation of protein synthesis and expression of LTD after mGluR activation are only partially understood. We investigated the role of several pathways linked to mGluR activation, translation initiation, and induction of LTD. We found that Group I mGluR-dependent protein synthesis and associated LTD, as induced by the agonist (RS)-3,5-dihydrophenylglycine (DHPG) or paired-pulse synaptic stimulation, was dependent on activation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIalpha (CaMKII). DHPG induced a transient increase in the level of phospho-CaMKII (phospho-CaMKII(T286)) in synaptoneurosomes prepared from whole hippocampus and in CA1 minislices. In synaptoneurosomes, DHPG also induced an increase in phosphorylation of eIF4E, and an increase in protein synthesis that was abolished by translation inhibitors and the CaMKII inhibitors 1-[N,O-bis(5-isoquinolinesulphonyl)-N-methyl-l-tyrosyl]-4-phenylpiperazine (KN62) and 2-[N-(2-hydroxyethyl)]-N-(4-methoxybenzenesulfonyl)amino-N-(4-chloro-cinnamyl)-N- methylbenzylamine (KN93). In field recordings from CA1, both the translation inhibitor cycloheximide and KN62 significantly reduced DHPG-induced LTD. Combined application did not further reduce the LTD, suggesting a common mechanism. In whole-cell recordings, a third CaMKII inhibitor, AIP (autocamtide-2-related inhibitory peptide), significantly reduced the DHPG-induced LTD of synaptic currents. Inhibition of the classical pathway mediating many Group I mGluR effects by blocking PKC (protein kinase C) or PLC (phospholipase C) did not impair DHPG-induced protein synthesis or LTD. Collectively, these findings demonstrate an important role for CaMKII in mediating the initiation of protein synthesis that then supports the postsynaptic expression of DHPG-induced LTD.