Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an organelle responsible for correct folding and sorting of proteins contributing to neurogenesis and neuronal cell death. We used rapid kindling to analyze specific ER stress marker expression underlying focal epileptogenesis. Seven-week-old rats were divided into three groups: sham (n = 6), partially kindled (n = 8), and over-kindled rats (n = 9). Over kindled rats received over100 stimuli. Partially kindled animals had stimuli halted at stage 2. Protein from ipsilateral hippocampus was electrophoresed on SDS-PAGE, followed by hybridization with primary antibodies, anti-KDEL (-Lys-Asp-Glu-coo-), Bcl-2, BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor), CHOP (C/EBP-homolog protein), C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein), NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate; -R1 &2A), GluR1 (glutamate receptor), and beta-tubulin. Western blotting revealed that the ER stress marker BiP (immunoglobulin heavy chain-binding protein) was markedly increased in both partially- and over-kindled groups. BiP expression was ninefold greater than control in partially kindling while twofold greater than control in over-kindled animals. Although ER stress response was accelerated, CHOP expression, which upregulates when apoptosis signaling is accelerated by ER stress, was suppressed. Bcl-2, which acts as an anti-apoptotic molecule, was upregulated in the over-kindled group. Remarkable elevation of BiP was found in partially kindled animals, but not in over-kindled. Over-kindled rats had spontaneous generalized seizure, while partially kindled ones had only partial seizures. Elevation of markers of ER stress in partial seizures might reflect transfer of discharge to contralateral limbic structures. We observed indications of functional changes and neurogenesis in limbic structure during kindling. Widespread indications of functional changes in several membrane and secreted proteins, including NMDA-R1 & R2A and BDNF, for mossy fiber re-construction on the CA3 area, which are related to protein synthesis in the ER, may be important in epileptogenesis.