BACKGROUND: Ethanol consumption during pregnancy can lead to fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), which consists of the complete spectrum of developmental deficits including neurological dysfunction. FASD is associated with a variety of neurobehavioral disturbances dependent on the age and duration of exposure. Ethanol exposure in neonatal rodents can also induce widespread apoptotic neurodegeneration and long-lasting behavioral abnormalities similar to FASD. The developmental stage of neonatal rodent brains that are at the peak of synaptogenesis is equivalent to the third trimester of human gestation. METHODS: Male and female C57BL/6By mice were injected with ethanol (20%, 2.5 g/kg, 2 s.c. injections) or an equal volume of saline (controls) on postnatal day 7 (P7). Animals were allowed to mature and at 3 months were tested on an olfactory habituation task known to be dependent on piriform cortex function, a hippocampal-dependent object place memory task, and used for electrophysiological testing of spontaneous and odor-evoked local field potential (LFP) activity in the olfactory bulb, piriform cortex, and dorsal hippocampus. RESULTS: P7 ethanol induced widespread cell death within 1 day of exposure, with highest levels in the neocortex, intermediate levels in the dorsal hippocampus, and relatively low levels in the primary olfactory system. No impairment of odor investigation or odor habituation was detected in P7 ethanol-exposed 3-month-old mice compared to saline controls. However, hippocampal-dependent object place memory was significantly impaired in the P7 ethanol-treated adult mice. Odor-evoked LFP activity was enhanced throughout the olfacto-hippocampal pathway, primarily within the theta frequency band, although the hippocampus also showed elevated evoked delta frequency activity. In addition, functional coherence between the piriform cortex and olfactory bulb and between the piriform cortex and dorsal hippocampus was enhanced in the beta frequency range in P7 ethanol-treated adult mice compared to controls. CONCLUSIONS: P7 ethanol induces an immediate wave of regionally selective cell death followed by long-lasting changes in local circuit and regional network function that are accompanied by changes in neurobehavioral performance. The results suggest that both the activity of local neural circuits within a brain region and the flow of information between brain regions can be modified by early alcohol exposure, which may contribute to long-lasting behavioral abnormalities known to rely on those circuits.