Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an age-related neurodegenerative pathology in which defects in proteolytic clearance of amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) likely contribute to the progressive nature of the disorder. Lysosomal proteases of the cathepsin family exhibit up-regulation in response to accumulating proteins including Abeta(1-42). Here, the lysosomal modulator Z-Phe-Ala-diazomethylketone (PADK) was used to test whether proteolytic activity can be enhanced to reduce the accumulation events in AD mouse models expressing different levels of Abeta pathology. Systemic PADK injections in APP(SwInd) and APPswe/PS1DeltaE9 mice caused 3- to 8-fold increases in cathepsin B protein levels and 3- to 10-fold increases in the enzyme's activity in lysosomal fractions, while neprilysin and insulin-degrading enzyme remained unchanged. Biochemical analyses indicated the modulation predominantly targeted the active mature forms of cathepsin B and markedly changed Rab proteins but not LAMP1, suggesting the involvement of enhanced trafficking. The modulated lysosomal system led to reductions in both Abeta immunostaining as well as Abeta(x-42) sandwich ELISA measures in APP(SwInd) mice of 10-11 months. More extensive Abeta deposition in 20-22-month APPswe/PS1DeltaE9 mice was also reduced by PADK. Selective ELISAs found that a corresponding production of the less pathogenic Abeta(1-38) occurs as Abeta(1-42) levels decrease in the mouse models, indicating that PADK treatment leads to Abeta truncation. Associated with Abeta clearance was the elimination of behavioral and synaptic protein deficits evident in the two transgenic models. These findings indicate that pharmacologically-controlled lysosomal modulation reduces Abeta(1-42) accumulation, possibly through intracellular truncation that also influences extracellular deposition, and in turn offsets the defects in synaptic composition and cognitive functions. The selective modulation promotes clearance at different levels of Abeta pathology and provides proof-of-principle for small molecule therapeutic development for AD and possibly other protein accumulation disorders.