The effects of maternal exposure to amitraz on brain region monoamine levels of male and female offspring rats at 60 days of age were observed. Maternal and offspring body weight, physical and general activity development were unaffected by the exposure of dams to amitraz (20mg/kgbw, orally on days 6-21 of pregnancy and 1-10 of lactation). Male and female offspring were sacrificed at 60 days of age and possible alterations in the content and metabolism of NE, DA and 5-HT were determined in brain regions by HPLC. The results showed that all these neurotransmitter systems were altered in a brain regional-related manner. In male and female offspring, amitraz induced a significant decrease in the prefrontal cortex 5-HT and its metabolite 5-HIAA and DA and its metabolites DOPAC and HVA levels with interaction of sex. Nevertheless, we verified that striatum DA and 5-HT and corresponding metabolite contents decreased in male and female offspring without statistical distinction of sex. In contrast, amitraz did not modify 5-HT content, but caused an increase in 5-HIAA content in the medulla oblongata and hippocampus in male and female offspring. Alterations in the hippocampus DA, DOPAC and HVA levels after amitraz exposure were also observed displaying a sex interaction. NE levels also showed a decrease after amitraz treatment in the prefrontal cortex and striatum without statistical sex interaction, but MHPG levels decreased in both regions with a sex interaction. Amitraz evoked increases in 5-HT turnover in the prefrontal cortex as well as in DA turnover in the striatum and hippocampus but decreases in NE turnover in the hypothalamus, prefrontal cortex and striatum. The present findings indicated that maternal exposure to amitraz altered noradrenergic, serotonergic and dopaminergic neurochemistry in their offspring in the prefrontal cortex, striatum and hippocampus, and those variations could be related to several alterations in the functions in which these brain regions are involved.