Our previous study demonstrated that preconditioning by 3-times repetitive mild hypoxia significantly augmented expression of mitochondrial thioredoxin-2 (Trx-2) at 3 h after subsequent acute severe hypoxia in rat hippocampus. However, it was unclear whether this augmentation was due to build up of Trx-2 by mild hypoxia before severe hypoxia or by modification of reaction to severe hypoxia itself. To answer on this question we study the expression level during and after preconditioning without subsequent severe hypoxia. Trx-2 expression was studied by immunocytochemistry 3 h and 24 h after first session and 3 h and 24 h after last session of 3-times (spaced at 24 h) mild hypobaric hypoxia (360 Torr, 2h). At 3 h after 1-time hypoxia (first session of 3-time hypoxia) the total number of Trx-2-immunoreactive cells (Nt) was significantly decreased in contrast with control in CA2, CA3 and DG. The number of cells with intensive expression of Trx-2 (Ni) was reduced in CA1 and CA3. At 24 h after the same 1-time hypoxia Nt was lower than in control and at 3 h time-point in all hippocampal areas studied (CA1, CA2, CA3 and DG); Ni was decreased only compared to control in CA1 and CA3. At 3 h after last session of 3-times hypoxia Nt and Ni were significantly down regulated in comparison with control only in CA1. At 24 h after it Nt was significantly decreased compared to control in CA1, CA2 and CA3 (in DG the decrease was not statistically significant) but in all areas was higher than at 24 h after 1-time hypoxia. Dynamics of Nt changes from 3-hours after single to 24-hours after triple moderate hypoxia had the wave phase character. These findings indicate that Trx-2 expression in most areas of hippocampus was decreased to 24 h after 3-time mild hypoxia. Thus the augmentation of Trx-2 expression in hippocampal neurons of preconditioned animals in response to subsequent severe hypoxia is caused obviously not by Trx-2 accumulation during preconditioning sessions but by modification of reaction to severe impact.