Epileptogenesis, i.e., the process leading to epilepsy, is a presumed consequence of brain insults including head trauma, stroke, infections, tumors, status epilepticus (SE), and complex febrile seizures. Typically, brain insults produce morphological and functional alterations in the hippocampal formation, including neurodegeneration in CA1, CA3, and, most consistently, the dentate hilus. Most of these alterations develop gradually, over several days, after the insult, providing a therapeutic window of opportunity for neuroprotective agents in the immediate post-injury period. We have previously reported that prolonged (four weeks) treatment with the antiepileptic drug valproate (VPA) after SE prevents hippocampal damage and most of the behavioral alterations that occur after brain insult, but not the development of spontaneously occurring seizures. These data indicated that VPA, although not preventing epilepsy, might be an effective disease-modifying treatment following brain insult. The present study was designed to (1) determine the therapeutic window for the neuroprotective effect of VPA after SE; (2) compare the efficacy of different intermittent i.p. versus continuous i.v. VPA treatment protocols; and (3) compare VPA with the glutamate (AMPA) receptor antagonist NS1209. As in our previous study with VPA, SE was induced by sustained electrical stimulation of the basolateral amygdala in rats and terminated after 4 h by diazepam. In vehicle controls, >90% of the animals developed significant neurodegeneration in the dentate hilus, whereas damage in CA1 and CA3 was more variable. Hilar parvalbumin-expressing interneurons were more sensitive to the effects of seizures than somatostatin-stained hilar interneurons or hilar mossy cells. Among the various VPA treatment protocols, continuous infusion of VPA for 24 immediately following the SE was the most effective neuroprotective treatment, preventing most of the neuronal damage. Infusion with NS1209 for 24 h exhibited similar neuroprotective efficacy. These data demonstrate that short treatment after SE with either VPA or NS1209 is powerfully neuroprotective, and may be disease-modifying treatments following brain insult.