Profound behavioural changes occur in the mother at parturition, together with extensive remodelling of neural circuits. These changes include neurochemical, morphological and functional plasticity. The continuous generation of new neurones in the hippocampus and the olfactory system is an additional form of neuroplasticity that contributes to motherhood. This review describes the reciprocal relationships between hippocampal and olfactory neurogenesis and parental behaviour. Studies in rodents demonstrate that parturition and interactions with the young affect both cell proliferation and survival in a different manner across neurogenic zones. Species in which an individual recognition of the offspring is formed, such as sheep, show a down-regulation of neurogenesis during the perinatal period. This would function to decrease cell competition, favouring the selection of newborn neurones involved in olfactory recognition of the young. Also, in biparental species, increases in olfactory neurogenesis occur in the father in response to pup exposure during the early postpartum period. Oestradiol, corticosterone and prolactin changes associated with parturition are the main physiological factors involved in the regulation of neurogenesis that have been determined so far. In the father, prolactin mediates an enhancement of olfactory neurogenesis. Contradictory evidence indicates a functional link between neurogenesis and parenting behaviour. Mice receiving focal irradiation of the olfactory neurogenic subventricular zone show few disturbances in the expression of maternal behaviour, whereas a reduction of both hippocampal and olfactory neurogenesis as a result of the infusion of an anti-mitotic agent induces behavioural deficits. Disrupting prolactin signalling abolished increased paternal neurogenesis and offspring recognition by the father, and rescuing this neurogenesis restored recognition behaviour. More studies that selectively suppress the changes of neurogenesis are needed to confirm the role of new neurones in regulating parenting behaviour.