Purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of low molecular weight heparin, enoxaparin, on different parameters of the hippocampal damage following traumatic brain injury (TBI) in the rat. TBI of moderate severity was performed over the left parietal cortex using the lateral fluid percussion brain injury model. Animals were s.c. injected with either enoxaparin (1mg/kg) or vehicle 1, 7, 13, 19, 25, 31, 37, and 43 h after the TBI induction. Sham-operated, vehicle-treated animals were used as the control group. Rats were sacrificed 48h after the induction of TBI. Hippocampi were processed for spectrophotometric measurements of the products of oxidative lipid damage, thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS) levels, as well as the activities of antioxidant enzymes, superoxide dismutase (SOD), and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px). Moreover, the Western blotting analyses of the oxidized protein levels, expressions of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), pro- and mature-interleukin-1beta (pro-, and mature-IL-1beta), and active caspase-3 were performed. COX-2 expressions were also explored by using immunohistochemistry. Glial fibrillary acidic protein immunochistochemistry was performed with the aim to assess the level of astrocytic activity. Fluoro-Jade B staining was used to identify the level and extent of hippocampal neuronal injury. TBI caused statistically significant increases of the hippocampal TBARS and oxidized protein levels as well as COX-2, pro-IL-1beta, and active caspase-3 overexpressions, but it did not significantly affect the SOD and GSH-Px activities, the iNOS, and mature-IL-1beta expression levels. TBI also induced hippocampal reactive astrocytosis and neurodegeneration. Enoxaparin significantly decreased the hippocampal TBARS and oxidized protein levels, COX-2 overexpression and reactive gliosis, but it did not influence the SOD and GSH-Px activities, pro-IL-1beta and active caspase-3 overexpressions as well as neurodegeneration following TBI. These findings demonstrate that enoxaparin may reduce oxidative damage, inflammation and astrocytosis following TBI in the rat and could be a candidate drug for neuroprotective treatment of this injury.