Psychological, physical and/or immune stressors during pregnancy are associated with negative birth outcomes, such as preterm birth and developmental abnormalities. In rodents, prenatal stressors can alter the expression of 5alpha-reductase enzymes in the brain and may influence cognitive function and anxiety-type behaviour in the offspring. Progesterone plays a critical role in maintaining gestation. In the present study, it was hypothesised that 5alpha-reduced progesterone metabolites influence birth outcomes and/or the cognitive and neuroendocrine function of the offspring. 5alpha-Reduced steroids were manipulated in pregnant Long-Evans rats via the administration of vehicle, the 5alpha-reduced, neuroactive metabolite of progesterone, 5alpha-pregnan-3alpha-ol-20-one (3alpha,5alpha-THP, allopregnanolone; 10 mg/kg/ml, s.c.), or the 5alpha-reductase inhibitor, finasteride (50 mg/kg/ml, s.c.), daily from gestational days 17-21. Compared to vehicle or 3alpha,5alpha-THP treatment, finasteride, significantly reduced the length of gestation and the number of pups per litter found in the dams' nests after parturition. The behaviour of the offspring in hippocampus-dependent tasks (i.e. object recognition, open field) was examined on post-natal days 28-30. Compared to vehicle-exposed controls, prenatal 3alpha,5alpha-THP treatment significantly increased motor behaviour in females compared to males, decreased progesterone content in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and diencephalon, increased 3alpha,5alpha-THP and 17beta-oestradiol content in the hippocampus, mPFC and diencephalon, and significantly increased serum corticosterone concentrations in males and females. Prenatal finasteride treatment significantly reduced object recognition, decreased hippocampal 3alpha,5alpha-THP content, increased progesterone concentration in the mPFC and diencephalon, and increased serum corticosterone concentration in female (but not male) juvenile offspring, compared to vehicle-exposed controls. Thus, inhibiting the formation of 5alpha-reduced steroids during late gestation in rats reduces gestational length, the number of viable pups per litter, and impairs cognitive and neuroendocrine function in the juvenile offspring.