NMDA receptors have been hypothesized to play a role in various aspects of ethanol-related phenotypes, notably in ethanol withdrawal. However, the role of each of the specific subunits remains unclear. To address this issue, mice that are heterozygous for the NR1 deletion, and thus have a reduction in functional NMDA receptors, were examined for ethanol consumption and acute ethanol withdrawal. Additionally, mice were examined for the level of vocalization following footshock, and behavior in an elevated plus maze, to determine their responses to stress. In these behavioral tests, NR1 heterozygous mice were shown to consume significantly higher levels of ethanol in the two bottle-choice test showing a possible role for this receptor in ethanol consumption. Analysis of acute withdrawal found that the heterozygous mice exhibit lower levels of handling-induced convulsions consistent with a role in ethanol sensitivity or withdrawal. In contrast, no effects on stress-related phenotypes were detected. Levels of NR2A-NR2D subunits of the NMDA receptor in specific brain regions were compared between NR1+/- mice and wild-type controls to assess whether the behavioral responses were specific to the diminution in NR1 expression or whether these changes could be due to secondary changes in expression of other NMDA subunits. Real-time quantitative PCR, Western blot and immunohistochemistry were used to examine expression levels in the hippocampus, neocortex, striatum and cerebellum. For the majority of the subunits, no differences were found between the wild-type and heterozygous mice in any of the brain regions. However, the NR2B subunit exhibited differences in expression of RNA in the hippocampus and protein levels in multiple brain regions, between wild-type and NR1+/- mice. These results show that NR1 plays a role, through mechanisms as yet unknown, in the expression of NR2 subunits in a region and subtype specific manner. This provides evidence of the effects of altered levels of NR1 expression on ethanol withdrawal and consumption, and suggests that concomitant changes in the levels of NR2B may contribute to that effect.