Alterations of the serotonergic system are involved in the pathophysiology of mood disorders and represent an important target for its pharmacological treatment. Genetic deletion of the serotonin transporter (SERT) in rodents leads to an anxious and depressive phenotype, and is associated with reduced neuronal plasticity as indicated by decreased brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) expression levels. One of the transcription factors regulating Bdnf is the neuronal PAS domain protein 4 (Npas4), which regulates activity-dependent genes and neuroprotection, and has a critical role in the development of GABA synapses. On the basis of these premises, we investigated the expression of Npas4 and GABAergic markers in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of homozygous (SERT(-/-)) and heterozygous (SERT(+/-)) knockout rats, and analyzed the effect of long-term duloxetine treatment on the expression of these targets. We found that Npas4 expression was reduced in both the brain structures of adult SERT(+/-) and SERT(-/-) animals. This effect was already present in adolescent SERT(-/-), and could be mimicked by prenatal exposure to the antidepressant fluoxetine. Moreover, SERT(-/-) rats showed a strong impairment of the GABAergic system, as indicated by the reduction of several markers, including the vesicular transporter (Vgat), glutamic acid decarboxylase-67 (Gad67), the receptor subunit GABA A receptor, gamma 2 (GABA(A)-gamma2), and calcium-binding proteins that label subgroups of the GABAergic neurons. Interestingly, chronic treatment with the antidepressant duloxetine was able to restore the physiological levels of Npas4 and GABAergic markers in SERT(-/-) rats, although some differences in the modulation of GABAergic genes exist between hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Our results demonstrate that SERT knockout rats, an animal model of mood disorders, have reduced Npas4 expression that correlates with decreased expression of Bdnf exon I and IV. These changes lead to an impairment of the GABAergic system that may contribute to the anxious and depressive phenotype associated with inherited SERT downregulation.