OBJECT: The goal in this study was to assess the role of longitudinal hippocampal circuits in the generation of interictal and ictal activity in temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) and to evaluate the effects of multiple hippocampal transections (MHT). METHODS: In 6 patients with TLE, the authors evaluated the synchrony of hippocampal interictal and ictal epileptiform discharges by using a cross-correlation analysis, and the effect of MHT on hippocampal interictal spikes was studied. Five of the 6 patients were studied with depth electrodes, and epilepsy surgery was performed in 4 patients (anterior temporal lobectomy in 1 and MHT in 3). RESULTS: Four hundred eighty-two (95.1%) of 507 hippocampal spikes showed an anterior-to-posterior propagation within the hippocampus, with a fixed peak-to-peak interval. During seizures, a significant increase of synchronization between different hippocampal regions and between the hippocampus and the ipsilateral anterior parahippocampal gyrus was observed in all seizures. An ictal increase in synchronization between the hippocampus and ipsilateral amygdala was seen in only 24.1% of the seizures. No changes in synchronization were noticed during seizures between the hippocampi and the amygdala on either side. The structure leading the epileptic seizures varied over time during a given seizure and also from one seizure to another. Spike analysis during MHT demonstrated that there were two spike populations that reacted differently to this procedure--namely, 1) spikes that showed maximum amplitude at the head of the hippocampus (type H); and 2) spikes that showed the highest amplitude at the hippocampal body (type B). A striking decrease in amplitude and frequency of type B spikes was noticed in all 3 patients after transections at the head or anterior portion of the hippocampal body. Type H spikes were seen in 2 cases and did not change in amplitude and frequency throughout MHT. Type B spikes showed constantly high cross-correlation values in different derivations and a relatively fixed peak-to-peak interval before MHT. This fixed interpeak delay disappeared after the first transection, although high cross-correlation values persisted unchanged. All patients who underwent MHT remained seizure free for more than 2 years. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that synchronized discharges involving the complete anterior-posterior axis of the hippocampal/parahippocampal (H/P) formation underlie the spread of epileptiform discharges outside the H/P structures and, therefore, for the generation of epileptic seizures originating in the H/P structures. This conclusion is supported by the following observations. 1) Hippocampal spikes are consistently synchronized in the whole hippocampal structures, with a fixed delay between the different hippocampal areas. 2) One or two transections between the head and body of the hippocampal formation are sufficient to abolish hippocampal spikes that are synchronized along the anterior-posterior axis of the hippocampus. 3) Treatment with MHT leads to seizure freedom in patients with H/P epilepsy.