The involvement of aldehyde adducts in the etiology of alcoholism continues to be supported by a number of experimental findings. These metabolites are synthesized endogenously from a condensation reaction of a biogenic aldehyde with a catechol- or indole-amine and act in the brain to augment or suppress the drinking of ethyl alcohol. When given by the intracerebroventricular route in an animal which does not prefer alcohol, certain tetrahydro-isoquinolines and beta-carbolines can augment significantly the voluntary intake of alcohol even in aversive concentrations. This paper describes the historical background and current status of the "Multiple Metabolite" theory of alcoholism. The recent identification of anatomical structures in the limbic-midbrain, limbic-forebrain of the Sprague-Dawley rat, which mediate changes in the intake of alcohol induced by tetrahydropapaveroline (THP) is also described. When injected in a low dose of 25 ng in a specific site, over a 3-day period, THP induces persistent increases in the intake of alcohol even in aversive concentrations. These THP-reactive sites comprise the substantia nigra, reticular formation, medial lemniscus, zona incerta, medial forebrain bundle, nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercle, lateral septal nucleus, preoptic area, stria terminalis, and rostral hippocampus. A higher dose of 250 ng THP microinjected at homologous loci tends to inhibit the rat's self-selection of alcohol or exert no effect on drinking. Morphological mapping of histologically identified sites sensitive to THP revealed a distinct "circuitry" of neuronal structures overlapping both dopaminergic and enkephalinergic pathways. This "circuit" extends from the tegmental-nigral area of the midbrain rostrally to structures within the limbic-forebrain. When a THP-reactive structure, the N. accumbens, was lesioned by either of two neurotoxins, 6-hydroxydopamine or 5.7-dihydroxytryptamine, the rats' preference for alcohol increased sharply. This suggests that impairment of transmitter release, denervation supersensitivity or other perturbation of receptor function within this and other structures play a part in the aberrant drinking of alcohol. It is envisaged that a dopamine-enkephalin link underlies the mechanism for the onset, maintenance and permanency of alcohol preference generated by an aldehyde adduct. Finally, the "Two-Channel, Brain Metabolite" theory of alcoholism proposes that the transitory presence of an endogenously formed aldehyde adduct within cells of the brain causes a permanent perturbation of normal receptor processes and transmitter activity within synapses of specific structures of the limbic system. This theory thus explains the nature of the rewarding properties of alcohol as well as its complex addictive liability which is physiologically irreversible.