Integrating hippocampal anatomy from neuronal dendrites to whole system may help elucidate its relation to function. Toward this aim, we digitally traced the cytoarchitectonic boundaries of the dentate gyrus (DG) and areas CA3/CA1 throughout their entire longitudinal extent from high-resolution images of thin cryostatic sections of adult rat brain. The 3D computational reconstruction identified all isotropic 16 mum voxels with appropriate subregions and layers (http://krasnow1.gmu.edu/cn3/hippocampus3d). Overall, DG, CA3, and CA1 occupied comparable volumes (15.3, 12.2, and 18.8 mm(3), respectively), but displayed substantial rostrocaudal volumetric gradients: CA1 made up more than half of the posterior hippocampus, whereas CA3 and DG were more prominent in the anterior regions. The CA3/CA1 ratio increased from approximately 0.4 to approximately 1 septo-temporally because of a specific change in stratum radiatum volume. Next we virtually embedded 1.8 million neuronal morphologies stochastically resampled from 244 digital reconstructions, emulating the dense packing of granular and pyramidal layers, and appropriately orienting the principal dendritic axes relative to local curvature. The resulting neuropil occupancy reproduced recent electron microscopy data measured in a restricted location. Extension of this analysis across each layer and subregion over the whole hippocampus revealed highly non-homogeneous dendritic density. In CA1, dendritic occupancy was >60% higher temporally than septally (0.46 vs. 0.28, s.e.m. approximately 0.05). CA3 values varied both across subfields (from 0.35 in CA3b/CA3c to 0.50 in CA3a) and layers (0.48, 0.34, and 0.27 in oriens, radiatum, and lacunosum-moleculare, respectively). Dendritic occupancy was substantially lower in DG, especially in the supra-pyramidal blade (0.18). The computed probability of dendrodendritic collision significantly correlated with expression of the membrane repulsion signal Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (DSCAM). These heterogeneous stereological properties reflect and complement the non-uniform molecular composition, circuit connectivity, and computational function of the hippocampus across its transverse, longitudinal, and laminar organization.