The hippocampus (HPP) plays a known role in learning novel spatial information. More specifically, the dentate gyrus (DG) hippocampal subregion is thought to support pattern separation, a mechanism for encoding and separating spatially similar events into distinct representations. Several studies have shown that lesions of the dorsal DG (dDG) in rodents result in inefficient spatial pattern separation for working memory; however, it is unclear whether selective dDG lesions disrupt spatial pattern separation for reference memory. Therefore, the current study investigated the role of the dDG in pattern separation using a spatial reference memory paradigm to determine whether the dDG is necessary for acquiring spatial discriminations for adjacent locations. Male Long-Evans rats were randomly assigned to receive bilateral intracranial infusions of colchicine or saline (control) into the dDG. Following recovery from surgery, each rat was pseudo-randomly assigned to an adjacent arm or separate arm condition and subsequently tested on a place-learning task using an eight-arm radial maze. Rats were trained to discriminate between a rewarded arm and a nonrewarded arm that were either adjacent to one another or separated by a distance of two arm positions. Each rat received 10 trials per day and was tested until the animal reached a criterion of nine correct choices out of 10 consecutive trials across 2 consecutive days of testing. Both groups acquired spatial discriminations for the separate condition at similar rates. However, in the adjacent condition, dDG lesioned animals required significantly more trials to reach the learning criterion than controls. The results suggest that dDG lesions decrease efficiency in pattern separation resulting in impairments in the adjacent condition involving greater overlap among the distal cues. Conversely, in the separate condition, there was less overlap among distal cues during encoding and less need for pattern separation. These findings provide further support for a critical role for the dDG in spatial pattern separation by demonstrating the importance of a processing mechanism that is capable of reducing interference among overlapping spatial inputs across a variety of memory demands.