Our previous study demonstrates that delayed (initiated 24h post injury) erythropoietin (EPO) therapy for traumatic brain injury (TBI) significantly improves spatial learning. In this study, we investigated the impact of inhibition of EPO treatment-mediated neurogenesis on spatial learning after experimental TBI. Young male Wistar rats (318+/-7 g) were subjected to unilateral controlled cortical impact injury. TBI rats received delayed EPO treatment (5000 U/kg in saline) administered intraperitoneally once daily at 1, 2, and 3 days post injury and intracerebroventricular (icv) infusion of either a mitotic inhibitor cytosine-b-D-arabinofuranoside or vehicle (saline) for 14 days. Another 2 groups of TBI rats were treated intraperitoneally with saline and infused icv with either a mitotic inhibitor Ara-C or saline for 14 days. Animals receiving sham operation were infused icv with either Ara-C infusion or saline. Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) was administered to label dividing cells. Spatial learning was assessed using a modified Morris water maze test. Animals were sacrificed at 35 days after injury and brain sections stained for immunohistochemical analyses. As compared to the saline treatment, immunohistochemical analysis revealed that delayed EPO treatment significantly increased the number of BrdU-positive cells and new neurons co-stained with BrdU and NeuN (mature neuron marker) in the dentate gyrus in TBI rats. EPO treatment improved spatial learning after TBI. Ara-C infusion significantly abolished neurogenesis and spatial learning recovery after TBI and EPO treatment. Both EPO and Ara-C reduced the number of astrocytes and microglia/macrophages in the dentate gyrus after TBI. Our findings are highly suggestive for an important role of EPO-amplified dentate gyrus neurogenesis as one of the mechanisms underlying EPO therapeutic treatments after TBI, strongly indicating that strategies promoting endogenous neurogenesis may hold an important therapeutic potential for treatment of TBI.