All organisms exhibit a wide range of emotional behaviors and interact with the environment in different ways. Some individuals may be more quiet and shy whereas others are more outgoing and adventurous. These temperamental and personality differences can predispose individuals to certain psychopathologies which may be influenced by genetic vulnerability and/or early life experiences. Rodent models can be used to recapitulate emotional reactivity differences, and these models can, in turn, be used to examine potential neurobiological underpinnings of these traits. The present study utilizes two strains of rats that were selectively bred for differences in novelty seeking. High Novelty-Responding (bHR) rats are very active in response to novelty, exhibit exaggerated risk-taking, aggression, impulsivity, and show increased behavioral response to cocaine. Low Novelty-Responding (bLR) rats show increased anxiety, depressive behavior and vulnerability to chronic stress. One way in which the bHR versus bLR behavioral phenotypes may differ is through epigenetic modification of DNA. DNA can be modified through processes such as acetylation or methylation to either enhance or subdue gene expression. This study examines putative differences in methylation levels in the hippocampus and amygdala of developing bHR-bLR rats. Previous research observed widespread gene expression differences in the bLR developing hippocampus, and the current study aims to begin to examine potential epigenetic factors that may contribute to those gene differences. The amygdala was chosen because it is involved in emotional processes, in part through its connections with the hippocampus. Therefore, the present study used in situ hybridization to assess the expression of DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) mRNA in the hippocampus, amygdala and several other brain areas of bHR and bLR pups at three developmental time points: postnatal days (P) 7, 14, and 21. We focused on the first 3 postnatal weeks, in part to parallel our early microarray gene expression work, and because this represents a critical period of brain development, which shapes individuals' lifelong emotional and stress reactivity. We found significant differences in dentate gyrus and CA3 regions of the hippocampus at P7 with no differences seen at P14 or P21. Interestingly, we also found significant bHR-bLR DNMT1 differences at P7 within the lateral, basolateral and medial nuclei of the amygdala, with no difference at P14 and P21, suggesting that the first postnatal week is a critical period for DNA methylation during brain development.