Heat shock proteins (Hsps) are a set of molecular chaperones involved in cellular repair. They provide protective mechanisms that allow cells to survive potentially lethal insults, In response to a conditioning stress their expression is increased. Here we examined the connection between Hsps and Abeta(42), the amyloid peptide involved in the pathological sequence of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Extracellular Abeta(42) associates with neuronal cells and is a major constituent of senile plaques, one of the hallmarks of AD. Although Hsps are generally thought to prevent accumulation of misfolded proteins, there is a lack of mechanistic evidence that heat shock chaperones directly modulate Abeta(42) toxicity. In this study we show that neither extracellular Abeta(42) nor Abeta(42/)PrP(C) trigger the heat shock response in neurons. To address the influence of the neuroprotective heat shock response on cellular Abeta(42), Western analysis of Abeta(42) was performed following external Abeta(42) application. Five hours after a conditioning heat shock, Abeta(42) association with CAD cells was increased compared to control neurons. However, at forty-eight hours following heat shock Abeta(42) levels were reduced compared to that found for control cells. Moreover, transient transfection of the stress induced Hsp40, decreased CAD levels of Abeta(42). In contrast to CAD cells, hippocampal neurons transfected with Hsp40 retained Abeta(42) indicating that Hsp40 modulation of Abeta(42) proteostasis is cell specific. Mutation of the conserved HPD motif within Hsp40 significantly reduced the Hsp40-mediated Abeta(42) increase in hippocampal cultures indicating the importance of this motif in regulating cellular Abeta(42). Our data reveal a biochemical link between Hsp40 expression and Abeta(42) proteostasis that is cell specific. Therefore, increasing Hsp40 therapeutically with the intention of interfering with the pathogenic cascade leading to neurodegeneration in AD should be pursued with caution.