Childhood status epilepticus (SE) initiates an epileptogenic process that leads to spontaneous seizures and hippocampal pathology characterized by neuronal loss, gliosis and an imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission. It remains unclear whether these changes are a cause or consequence of chronic epilepsy. In this study, in vivo MRS was used in a post-SE juvenile rat model of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) to establish the temporal evolution of hippocampal injury and neurotransmitter imbalance. SE was induced in P21 rats by injection of lithium and pilocarpine. Four and eight weeks after SE, in vivo (1) H and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-edited MRS of the hippocampus was performed in combination with dedicated ex vivo immunohistochemistry for the interpretation and validation of MRS findings. MRS showed a 12% decrease (p<0.0001) in N-acetylaspartate and a 15% increase (p=0.0226) in choline-containing compound concentrations, indicating neuronal death and gliosis, respectively. These results were confirmed by FluoroJade and vimentin staining. Furthermore, severe and progressive decreases in GABA (-41%, p<0.001) and glutamate (Glu) (-17%, p<0.001) were found. The specific severity of GABAergic cell death was confirmed by parvalbumin immunoreactivity (-68%, p<0.001). Unexpectedly, we found changes in glutamine (Gln), the metabolic precursor of both GABA and Glu. Gln increased at 4 weeks (+36%, p<0.001), but returned to control levels at 8 weeks. This decrease was consistent with the simultaneous decrease in glutamine synthase immunoreactivity (-32%, p=0.037). In vivo MRS showed gliosis and (predominantly GABAergic) neuronal loss. In addition, an increase in Gln was detected, accompanied by a decrease in glutamine synthase immunoreactivity. This may reflect glutamine synthase downregulation in order to normalize Gln levels. These changes occurred before spontaneous recurrent seizures were present but, by creating a pre-epileptic state, may play a role in epileptogenesis. MRS can be applied in a clinical setting and may be used as a noninvasive tool to monitor the development of TLE.