PURPOSE: Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is involved in critical aspects of cell survival in response to hypoxia and regulates vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression. Previous experimental and human studies in epilepsy show up-regulation of VEGF following seizures, although expression of HIF-1alpha as its potential regulator has not been explored. We used a postmortem (PM) series from patients with epilepsy and hippocampal sclerosis (HS) to investigate patterns of expression of HIF-1alpha and VEGF and their potential contribution to neuroprotection. METHOD: In 33 PMs (17 cases with unilateral HS, 3 with bilateral HS, 3 with No-HS, and 10 controls), we quantified neuronal immunolabeling for HIF-1alpha and VEGF in hippocampal subfields. KEY FINDINGS: HIF-1alpha- and VEGF-immunopositive hippocampal neurones were observed in HS, No-HS, and also in control cases; there was no significant difference in overall labeling between epilepsy cases and controls. In positive cases, HIF-1alpha and VEGF neuronal labeling localized primarily in CA1, CA4, and CA3 subfields in all groups; significantly more positive neurons were seen in the entorhinal cortex in epilepsy cases (p < 0.05). Labeling lateralized to the side of sclerosis in unilateral HS cases, with significant differences between hemispheres (p < 0.05). There was a trend for high HIF-1alpha labeling scores in patients with Dravet syndrome without HS and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) cases, and lower scores with long seizure-free periods prior to death. Hippocampal HIF-1alpha and VEGF labeling showed a significant correlation. There was neuronal colocalization of HIF-1alpha and VEGF. SIGNIFICANCE: Regional expression patterns are in keeping with seizure-related activation of HIF-1alpha and VEGF. The prominent expression in non-HS cases could support an overall neuroprotective effect. Correlation between HIF-1alpha and VEGF neuronal immunolabeling supports HIF-1alpha-mediated induction of VEGF in epilepsy.