Cut dorsal root axons regenerate into transplants of embryonic spinal cord and form synapses that resemble those found in the dorsal horn of normal spinal cord. One aim of the present study was to determine whether these axons also regenerate into and establish synapses within transplants of embryonic brain. A second aim was to compare the patterns of growth in embryonic brain and spinal cord transplants. Embryonic spinal cord or brain was transplanted into the lumbar enlargement of adult Sprague-Dawley rats, the L4 or L5 dorsal root was cut, and the cut root was juxtaposed to the transplant. The transplants included whole pieces or dissociated cell suspensions of embryonic day 14 (E14) spinal cord, or whole pieces of E14 neocortex, E18 occipital cortex, E15 cerebellum, or E18 hippocampus. One month later the regenerated dorsal root axons were labeled by immunocytochemical methods to demonstrate calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). CGRP-immunoreactive axons regenerated into all the transplants examined and formed synapses in the neocortex and cerebellum transplants in which they were sought. Synapses were far rarer in neocortex and cerebellum than we had observed previously in transplanted spinal cord, and the patterns of growth differed in transplants of spinal cord and brain. In solid transplants of spinal cord, regenerated axons remained relatively close to the interface with the dorsal root, branched, and formed bundles. Areas of dense ingrowth were separated by regions with few labeled axons. In transplants of brain regions, the regenerated axons were few, unbranched, and appeared as individual fibers rather than in bundles, but they were distributed widely in neocortex transplants. The results of quantitative studies confirmed these observations. The area fraction occupied by regenerated axons in solid spinal cord transplants was significantly larger than in occipital cortex or cerebellum transplants. Distribution histograms of the area occupied in transplants demonstrated that regenerated axons were distributed sparsely but homogeneously in transplants of brain, whereas spinal cord transplants were heterogeneous for regenerated axons and contained areas in which growth was dense or sparse. In contrast, several measurements of axon distribution, including area, longest axis, and length of lateral extension, indicated that CGRP-labeled axons spread more widely in occipital cortex transplants than in solid transplants of spinal cord or cerebellum. The results indicate that embryonic CNS tissues that are not normal targets support or enhance the growth of severed dorsal roots and suggest that the conditions that constitute a permissive environment for regenerating axons are relatively nonspecific.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)