Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) results in the degeneration of neurons in the hippocampus that eventuates in neurocognitive deficits. We were therefore interested in determining the effects of apnea on monosynaptic excitatory processes in a hippocampal pathway (cornu ammonis 3-cornu ammonis 1, CA3-CA1) that has been shown to mediate the processing of cognitive information. In addition, to substantiate an anatomical basis for the cognitive dysfunction that occurs in OSA patients, we examined the effects of apnea with respect to neurodegenerative changes (apoptosis) in the same hippocampal pathway. In order to determine the effects of apnea, an automated system for the generation and analysis of single and recurrent periods of apnea was developed. Utilizing this system, the field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) generated by pyramidal neurons in the CA1 region of the hippocampus was monitored in alpha-chloralose anesthetized rats following stimulation of glutamatergic afferents in the CA3 region. A stimulus-response (input-output) curve for CA3-CA1 synaptic activity was determined. In addition, a paired-pulse paradigm was employed to evaluate, electrophysiologically, the presynaptic release of glutamate. Changes in the synaptic efficacy were assessed following single episodes of apnea induced by ventilatory arrest (60 to 80 s duration, mean=72 s; mean oxygen desaturation was 53% of normoxia level). Apnea resulted in a significant potentiation of the amplitude (mean=126%) and slope (mean=117%) of the baseline CA1 fEPSP. This increase in the fEPSP was accompanied by a significant decrease in the amplitude (71%) and slope (81%) of normalized paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) ratios. Since the potentiation of the fEPSP is inversely proportional to changes in PPF ratio, the potentiated fEPSP accompanied by the reduced PPF reveals that apnea produces an abnormal increase in the preterminal release of glutamate that results in the over-activation (and calcium overloading) of hippocampal CA1 neurons. Thus, we conclude that individual episodes of apnea result in the development of excitotoxic processes in the hippocampal CA3-CA1 pathway that is critically involved in the processing of cognitive information. Morphologically, the deleterious effect of recurrent apnea was substantiated by the finding of apoptosis in CA1 neurons of apneic (but not normoxic) animals.