Adderall is widely prescribed for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) though long term neurological effects of the main ingredient d-amphetamine are not well understood. The purpose of this study was to examine effects of clinically prescribed doses of d-amphetamine and one abuse dose administered from childhood to adulthood on adult hippocampal neurogenesis and activation of the granule layer of the dentate gyrus. Beginning in early adolescence (age 28 days) to adulthood (age 71), male C57BL/6J mice were administered twice daily i.p. injections of vehicle, 0.25, 0.5 or 2mg/kg d-amphetamine. Locomotor activity was measured in home cages by video tracking. At age 53-56, mice received bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) injections to label dividing cells. Immunohistochemical detection of BrdU, neuronal nuclear protein (NeuN), doublecortin (DCX) and Ki67 was used to measure neurogenesis and cell proliferation at age 71. DeltaFosB was measured as an indicator of repeated neuronal activation. An additional cohort of mice was treated similarly except euthanized at age 58 to measure activation of granule neurons from d-amphetamine (by detection of c-Fos) and cell proliferation (Ki67) at a time when the fate of BrdU cells would have been determined in the first cohort. d-Amphetamine dose-dependently increased survival and differentiation of BrdU cells into neurons and increased number of DCX cells without affecting the number of Ki67 cells. Low doses of d-amphetamine decreased c-Fos and DeltaFosB in the granule layer. Only the high dose induced substantial locomotor stimulation and sensitization. Results suggest both therapeutic and abuse doses of d-amphetamine increase the number of new neurons in the hippocampus when administered from adolescence to adulthood by increasing survival and differentiation of cells into neurons not by increasing progenitor cell proliferation. Mechanisms for amphetamine-induced neurogenesis are unknown but appear activity independent. Results suggest part of the beneficial effects of therapeutic doses of d-amphetamine for ADHD could be via increased hippocampal neurogenesis.