OBJECTIVE: Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) is concentrated in zones of active neurogenesis in the prenatal and postnatal rodent brain and plays an important role in the regulation of neurogenesis. However, little is known about mGluR5 in the prenatal human brain. Here, we aimed to explore the expression pattern and cellular distribution of mGluR5 in human fetal hippocampus. METHODS: Thirty-four human fetuses were divided into four groups according to gestational age: 9-11, 14-16, 22-24 and 32-36 weeks. The hippocampus was dissected out and prepared. The protein and mRNA expression of mGluR5 were evaluated by Western blot and immunohistochemistry or real-time PCR. The cellular distribution of mGluR5 was observed with double-labeling immunofluorescence. RESULTS: Both mGluR5 mRNA and protein were detected in the prenatal human hippocampus by real-time PCR and immunoblotting, and the expression levels increased gradually over time. The immunohistochemistry results were consistent with immunoblotting and showed that mGluR5 immunoreactivity was mainly present in the inner marginal zone (IMZ), hippocampal plate (HP) and ventricular zone (VZ). The double-labeling immunofluorescence showed that mGluR5 was present in neural stem cells (nestin-positive), neuroblasts (DCX-positive) and mature neurons (NeuN-positive), but not in typical astrocytes (GFAP-positive). The cells co-expressing mGluR5 and nestin were mainly located in the IMZ, HP and subplate at 11 weeks, all layers at 16 weeks, and CA1 at 24 weeks. As development proceeded, the number of mGluR5/nestin double-positive cells decreased gradually so that there were only a handful of double-labeled cells at 32 weeks. However, mGluR5/DCX double-positive cells were only found in the HP, IZ and IMZ at 11 weeks. CONCLUSION: The pattern of mGluR5 expression by neural stem/progenitor cells, neuroblasts and neurons provides important anatomical evidence for the role of mGluR5 in the regulation of human hippocampal development.