The olfactory system continuously incorporates new neurons into functional circuits throughout life. Axons from olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) in the nasal cavity synapse on mitral, tufted and periglomerular (PG) cells in the main olfactory bulb, and low levels of turnover within the OSN population results in ingrowth of new axons under normal physiological conditions. Subpopulations of bulb interneurons are continually eliminated by apoptosis, and are replaced by new neurons derived from progenitors in the adult forebrain subventricular zone. Integration of new neurons, including PG cells that are contacted by sensory axons, leads to ongoing reorganization of adult olfactory bulb circuits. The mechanisms regulating this adaptive structural plasticity are not all known, but the process is reminiscent of early nervous system development. Neurotrophic factors have well-established roles in controlling neuronal survival and connectivity during development, leading to speculation that trophic interactions between OSNs and their target bulb neurons may mediate some of these same processes in adults. A number of different trophic factors and their cognate receptors are expressed in the adult olfactory pathway. Neurotrophin-3 (NT3) is among these, as reflected by beta-galactosidase expression in transgenic reporter mice expressing lacZ under the NT3 promoter. Using a combination of approaches, including immunocytochemistry, real-time PCR of laser-captured RNA, and adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of NT3 fusion peptides in vivo, we demonstrate that OSNs express and anterogradely transport NT3 to the olfactory bulb. We additionally observe that in mice treated with adenovirus encoding NT3 tagged with hemagglutinin (HA), a subset of bulb neurons expressing the TrkC neurotrophin receptor are immunoreactive for HA, suggesting their acquisition of the fusion peptide from infected sensory neurons. Our results therefore provide evidence that OSNs may serve as an afferent source of trophic signals for the adult mouse olfactory bulb.