Kynurenic acid is a broad-spectrum excitatory amino acid (EAA) receptor antagonist which is present in the mammalian central nervous system. We describe a method for the measurement of kynurenic acid using isocratic reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with fluorometric detection enhanced by Zn2+ as a postcolumn reagent. The method requires no prior sample preparation procedures other than extraction with 0.1 M HClO4. The reliability of the primary fluorometric method was verified by comparing measurements of tissue concentrations of kynurenic acid in human cerebral cortex and putamen using three different methods of separation with fluorometric detection, as well as four methods utilizing HPLC with coulometric electrode array system (CEAS) detection. All seven methods produced comparable results. The concentration of kynurenic acid in human cerebral cortex was 2.07 +/- 0.61 pmol/mg protein, and in human putamen, 3.38 +/- 0.81 pmol/mg protein. Kynurenic acid was also found to be present in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) at a concentration of 5.09 +/- 1.04 nM. The regional distribution of kynurenic acid in the rat brain was examined. Kynurenic acid concentrations were highest in brainstem (149.6 fmol/mg protein) and olfactory bulb (103.9 fmol/mg protein) and lowest in thalamus (26.0 fmol/mg protein). There were no significant postmortem changes in kynurenic acid concentrations in cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and striatum at intervals ranging from 0 to 24 h. Perfusion of the cerebral vasculature with normal saline prior to sacrifice did not significantly alter kynurenic acid content in rat hippocampus, cerebral cortex, or striatum. The analytical methods described are the most sensitive (10-30 fmol injection-1) and specific (utilizing both excitation and emissions properties and electrochemical reaction potentials, respectively) methods for determining kynurenic acid in brain tissue extracts and CSF. These methods should prove useful in examining whether kynurenic acid modulates EAA-mediated neurotransmission under physiologic conditions, as well as in determining the role of kynurenic acid in excitotoxic neuronal death.