Therapeutic hypothermia has emerged as an effective neuroprotective therapy for cardiac arrest survivors. There are a number of purported mechanisms for therapeutic hypothermia, but the exact mechanism still remains to be elucidated. Although hypothermia generally down-regulates protein synthesis and metabolism in mammalian cells, a small subset of homologous (>70%) cold-shock proteins (RNA-binding motif protein 3, RBM3 and cold-inducible RNA-binding protein, CIRP) are induced under these conditions. In addition, RBM3 up-regulation in neuronal cells has recently been implicated in hypothermia-induced neuroprotection. Therefore, we compared the effects of moderate (33.5 degrees C) and deep (17 degrees C) hypothermia with normothermia (37 degrees C) on the regulation of RBM3 and CIRP expressions in murine organotypic hippocampal slice cultures (OHSC), hippocampal neuronal cells (HT-22), and microglia cells (BV-2). Moderate hypothermia resulted in significant up-regulation of both RBM3 and CIRP mRNA in murine OHSC, but deep hyporthermia did not. RBM3 protein regulation was also significantly up-regulated by 33.5 degrees C, but no significant up-regulation of CIRP protein was observed in the OHSC. Additionally, OHSC exposed to 17 degrees C for 24h were positive for Propidium Iodide (PI) immunostaining, indicating the onset of cell death. Similarly, RBM3 gene expression in a HT-22 neuronal cells mono-culture and direct co-culture of HT-22 neuronal cells with BV-2 microglia cells were also up-regulated at 33.5 degrees C but only in the co-culture at 17 degrees C. No significant up-regulation of RBM3 nor CIRP gene expression were observed in a BV-2 mono-culture at either temperature. We observed that RBM3 mRNA and protein expressions in murine OHSC, as well as in mono-culture of HT-22 neuronal cells and direct co-culture of HT-22 neuronal cells with BV-2 microglia cells were significantly up-regulated by exposure to moderate hypothermia. These findings further support the implication of RBM3 as a potential effector for hypothermia-induced neuroprotection.