Evidence indicates that the prefrontal cortex and its regulation by afferent inputs are disrupted in schizophrenia. Using a validated rat model of schizophrenia based on prenatal administration of the mitotoxin methyl azoxymethanol acetate (MAM), we examined the convergent projections from the ventral hippocampus (vHipp) and the basolateral amygdala (BLA) in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). In vivo extracellular recordings were done in anesthetized rats to assess how prior stimulation of the BLA or vHipp input to the mPFC affected mPFC responses to subsequent stimulation of these regions. The interstimulus interval (ISI) of the BLA and vHipp pulse stimulation was varied randomly between 0 and 130 ms, and the probability of evoked spike response in the mPFC measured. We found that BLA input increased vHipp-evoked spike probability at ISIs 40-130 ms, but decreased spike probability at ISIs 10-20 ms. This would be consistent with activation of inhibitory interneurons at shorter ISIs by BLA stimulation. In contrast, in MAM-treated rats BLA stimulation increased vHipp-evoked spike probability in mPFC at all ISIs tested. Given that interneurons are driven primarily by N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) channel activation, the effects of the NMDA channel blocker, phencyclidine (PCP), were tested. PCP was found to completely attenuate the inhibitory effect of BLA input on vHipp-evoked responses in mPFC at shorter ISIs, causing the response in control rats treated with PCP to resemble that observed in the MAM rat. In contrast to the effects of BLA stimulation on vHipp-mPFC-evoked responses, there was no inhibitory period when examining the effects of vHipp stimulation on BLA-mPFC-evoked responses in control rats, but in MAM-treated rats there was a significant inhibition at short intervals. Thus, both affective input arising from the BLA and context-dependent input from the vHipp exert a modulatory effect on mPFC neural activity in response to these inputs. Whereas the BLA potentiated vHipp input to the mPFC at long intervals, there was a short-interval inhibitory period that appeared to be mediated by an NMDA-dependent drive of interneurons. This inhibitory modulation was absent in the model of schizophrenia and following PCP, which is consistent with an interneuron disruption in this disorder.