Previous studies in the rat have shown that a serotonergic depletion greatly potentiates the learning and memory impairments produced by pharmacological or lesion-induced cholinergic blockade in the forebrain. The impairment produced by combined serotonergic-cholinergic lesions is reminiscent of that seen in memory-impaired aged rats. In the present experiment, we investigated whether grafts of cholinergic septal tissue and serotonergic mesencephalic raphe tissue, placed in the hippocampus, could reverse the severe memory impairment produced by combined cholinergic-serotonergic lesions. Adult rats were given an intraventricular injection of 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine followed by a radiofrequency lesion of the septum 1-2 weeks later. Three weeks after lesion surgery, the rats were given bilateral intrahippocampal cell suspension grafts of either fetal septal or mesencephalic raphe tissue, or both. The rats were tested for spatial learning and memory in the Morris water maze task at 4 and 10 months after grafting. At 4 months, lesioned and grafted groups were all impaired compared to the normal controls in their swim time and distance swum to find the platform, and they did not show any spatially focussed search strategy in the spatial probe trial when the platform was removed from the tank. At 10 months, the rats with mixed cholinergic and serotonergic grafts were no longer impaired compared to normals in their swim time and distance to find the platform, and they were significantly improved compared to the other grafted groups. Moreover, in the spatial probe trial, the rats with mixed cholinergic and serotonergic grafts displayed a spatially focussed search behaviour over the previous platform site, which was not seen in the lesioned control rats or in the other graft groups. Morphological analysis of the hippocampus revealed that the septal grafts produced an acetylcholinesterase-positive innervation but were totally devoid of serotonin innervation. The raphe grafts produced mainly a serotonin innervation, of both acetylcholinesterase- and serotonin-positive fibres. The results suggest that a mixture of septal and raphe tissue is required when grafted to the hippocampal formation in order to ameliorate the severe spatial learning and memory impairments produced by a combined cholinergic and serotonergic denervation, and that each of these graft types separately are not sufficient to ameliorate such deficits.