The synaptic interactions between terminals of allocorticostriatal and thalamostriatal fibers and the cholinergic neurons in the nucleus accumbens were investigated using degeneration and dual labelling immunocytochemistry in Wistar rats. The presumptive cholinergic neurons were labelled with antibodies directed against choline acetyltransferase and the afferent fibers were labelled anterogradely with Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin. Fibers from the subiculum of the hippocampal formation and from the midline and intralaminar thalamus project densely into the medial nucleus accumbens where they overlap a relatively dense population of choline acetyltransferase-immunoreactive neurons. Varicosities containing Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin juxtapose the immunoreactive neurons. To study the possibility that the cholinergic neurons could be the synaptic targets of these incoming fibers, the subiculum, the fornix, and the midline/intralaminar thalamus were lesioned in separate animals and brain sections were immunoprocessed for choline acetyltransferase and studied with the electron microscope. In addition, dual-labelling electron microscopic immunocytochemistry was employed. In total, 164 synaptic terminals from the subiculum/hippocampus and 130 from the midline/intralaminar thalamus were examined; all formed asymmetrical synaptic specializations. No hippocampal endings were seen to contact the somata or primary dendrites of the choline acetyltransferase-immunoreactive neurons; however, three were found in synaptic contact with distal, immunolabelled dendritic shafts. Most hippocampal terminals established contacts with unlabelled spines. Fifteen percent of the thalamic endings were found to synapse on the somata and the primary and distal dendrites of the choline acetyltransferase-immunoreactive neurons. The remaining thalamic terminals established synaptic junctions with small unlabelled dendrites or spines. These findings have important implications not only for our understanding of the synaptic organization of the hippocampal and thalamic projections to the nucleus accumbens, but also for the contribution of the cholinergic neurons to the circuitry of this nucleus.