Exogenous stress like tissue damage and pathogen invasion during surgical trauma could lead to a peripheral inflammatory response and induce neuroinflammation, which can result in postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD). The cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway is a neurohumoral mechanism that plays a prominent role by suppressing the inflammatory response. Treatments with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors enhance cholinergic transmission and may therefore act as a potential approach to prevent neuroinflammation. In the presence or absence of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, adult Wistar rats underwent surgery alone or were additionally treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Physostigmine, which can overcome the blood-brain barrier or neostigmine acting only peripheral, served as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. The expression of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in the cortex, hippocampus, spleen and plasma was measured after 1 h, 24 h, 3 d and 7 d using Real-Time PCR, western blot analysis or cytometric bead array (CBA). Fluoro-Jade B staining of brain slices was employed to elucidate neurodegeneration. The activity of acetylcholinesterase was estimated using a spectrofluorometric method. Surgery accompanied by LPS-treatment led to increased IL-1beta gene and protein upregulation in the cortex and hippocampus but was significantly reduced by physostigmine and neostigmine. Furthermore, surgery in combination with LPS-treatment caused increased protein expression of IL-1, TNF-alpha and IL-10 in the spleen and plasma. Physostigmine and neostigmine significantly decreased the protein expression of IL-1 and TNF-alpha. Neuronal degeneration and the activity of acetylcholinesterase were elevated after surgery with LPS-treatment and reduced by physostigmine and neostigmine. Along with LPS-treatment, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors reduce the pro-inflammatory response as well as neurodegeneration after surgery in the cortex and hippocampus. This combination may represent a tool to break the pathogenesis of POCD.