OBJECTIVE: To observe the effects of Shuyu Ningxin Recipe (SNR) on the praxiology and the expressions of hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its receptor tyrosine kinase B (TrkB) of model rats with chronic stress-induced depression, thus exploring its anti-depression mechanisms. METHODS: Sixty adult SD rats were randomly divided into 6 groups, i.e., the normal control group, the model group, the fluoxetine group, the high dose SNR group, the medium dose SNR group, and the low dose SNR group, 10 in each group. All rats were subjected to establish chronic stress-induced depression model for 21 consecutive days. Except those in the normal control group, rats in the rest groups received gastrogavage from the 22nd day. Mice in the model group were administered with normal saline by gastrogavage. SNR at 25.0, 7.5, and 2.5 g/kg was respectively administered to rats in the high dose SNR group, the medium dose SNR group, and the low dose SNR group by gastrogavage. Fluoxetine suspension (12 mg/kg) was given to rats in the fluoxetine group by gastro-gavage. All medication lasted for 3 successive weeks. The weight, open-field test, and the immobility time in forced swimming test were determined before modeling, 3 weeks (after successful modeling), and 6 weeks (by the end of medication). The expressions of hippocampal BDNF and TrkB were measured after the brain tissues were drawn by the end of the experiment. RESULTS: Compared with the normal control group, the body weight grew slowly, the behavior index decreased, the immobility time in forced swimming test was prolonged, and the expressions of BDNF and TrkB were weaken in the model group (P <0.05, P <0.01).The body weight increased, the behavior was improved, the immobility time in forced swimming test was shortened, and the expressions of BDNF and TrkB were enhanced in the high dose SNR group and the fluoxetine group by the and of medication, showing statistical difference when compared with the model group (P <0.05, P <0.01). CONCLUSION: SNR could exert anti-depression by improving the expression levels of hippocampal BDNF and TrkB.