It is suggested that intracellular tau protein (tau), when released extracellularly upon neuron degeneration, could evoke direct toxic effects on the cholinergic neurotransmitter system through muscarinic receptors and thus contribute to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. In this study, we evaluated the in vitro effects of six naturally occurring monomeric tau isoforms on rat hippocampal synaptosomal choline transporters CHT1 (large transmembrane proteins associated with high-affinity choline transport and vulnerable to actions of amyloid beta peptides (Abeta) applied in vitro or in vivo). Some tau isoforms at nM concentrations inhibited choline transport in a dose- and time-dependent saturable manner (352 = 441 > 410 = 383 > 381 = 412) and effects were associated with changes in the Michaelis constant rather than in maximal velocity. Moreover, the actions of tau 352/441 were not influenced by previous depolarisation of synaptosomes or by previous depletion of membrane cholesterol. Specific binding of [3H]hemicholinium-3 was not significantly altered by tau 352/441 at higher nM concentrations. Results of in vitro tests on CHT1 transporters from cholesterol-depleted synaptosomes supported interactions between Abeta 1-40 and tau 352. In addition, we developed surface plasmon resonance biosensors to monitor complexes of Abeta 1-42 and tau 352 using a sandwich detection format. It seems, therefore, that protein tau, similar to Abeta peptides, can contribute to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease through its actions on CHT1 transporters. However, the interaction mechanisms are quite different (tau probably exerts its effects through direct interactions of microtubule binding repeats with extracellular portions of the CHT1 protein without influencing the choline recognition site, Abeta rather through lipid rafts in the surrounding membranes). An N-terminal insert of tau is not necessary but the N-terminal projection domain plays a role. The developed biosensor will be used to detect Abeta-tau complexes in cerebrospinal fluid in order to evaluate them as prospective biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease.