Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most common type of epilepsy in adults. Of the animal models developed to investigate the pathogenesis of TLE, the one with pilocarpine-induced seizures is most often used. After pilocarpine administration in animals, three distinct periods--acute, latent, and chronic--can be distinguished according to their behavior. The present paper is the continuation of our previous study which has shown an increased occurrence of creatine inclusions in rat hippocampal formations from the acute phase of pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus (SE) and positive correlation between their quantity and the total time of seizure activity within the observation period. In this paper, we tried to verify if anomalies in hippocampal creatine accumulation were the temporary or permanent effect of pilocarpine-evoked seizures. To realize this purpose, male Wistar rats in the latent phase (3 days after pilocarpine administration) were examined. The results obtained for the period when stabilization of animal behavior and EEG occurs were afterwards compared with ones obtained for the acute phase of pilocarpine-induced SE and for naive controls. To investigate the frequency of creatine inclusions within the hippocampal formation as well as in its selected areas (sectors 1-3 of Ammon's horn (CA1-CA3), dentate gyrus (DG), and hilus of DG) and cellular layers (pyramidal, molecular, multiform, and granular cell layers), synchrotron radiation-based Fourier-transform infrared microspectroscopy was used. The applied technique, being a combination of light microscopy and infrared spectroscopy, allowed us to localize microscopic details in the analyzed samples and provided information concerning their chemical composition. Moreover, the use of a synchrotron source of IR radiation allowed us to carry out the research at the diffraction-limited spatial resolution which, because of the typical size of creatine inclusions (from a few to dozens of micrometers), was necessary for our study. The comparison of epileptic animals in the latent phase with controls showed statistically significant increase in the number of creatine inclusions for most of the analyzed hippocampal regions, all examined cellular layers, as well as the whole hippocampal formation. Moreover, for the hilus of the DG and CA3 area, the number of creatine deposits was higher in the latent than in the acute phase after pilocarpine injection. In light of the obtained results, an anomaly in the hippocampal accumulation of creatine is the long-term effect of pilocarpine-evoked seizures, and the intensity of this phenomenon may increase with time passing from the primary injury.