Developmental Language Impairment (DLI) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 12% to 14% of the school-age children in the United States. While substantial studies have shown a wide range of linguistic and non-linguistic difficulty in individuals with DLI, very little is known about the neuroanatomical mechanisms underlying this disorder. In the current study, we examined the subcortical components of the corticostriatal system in young adults with DLI, including the caudate nucleus, the putamen, the nucleus accumbens, the globus pallidus, and the thalamus. Additionally, the four cerebral lobes and the hippocampus were also comprised for an exploratory analysis. We used conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to measure regional brain volumes, as well as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to assess water diffusion anisotropy as quantified by fractional anisotropy (FA). Two groups of participants, one with DLI (n=12) and the other without (n=12), were recruited from a prior behavioral study, and all were matched on age, gender, and handedness. Volumetric analyses revealed region-specific abnormalities in individuals with DLI, showing pathological enlargement bilaterally in the putamen and the nucleus accumbens, and unilaterally in the right globus pallidus after the intracranial volumes were controlled. Regarding the DTI findings, the DLI group showed decreased FA values in the globus pallidus and the thalamus but these significant differences disappeared after controlling for the whole-brain FA value, indicating that microstructural abnormality is diffuse and affects other regions of the brain. Taken together, these results suggest region-specific corticostriatal abnormalities in DLI at the macrostructural level, but corticostriatal abnormalities at the microstructural level may be a part of a diffuse pattern of brain development. Future work is suggested to investigate the relationship between corticostriatal connectivity and individual differences in language development.