The combined Golgi/electron microscope (EM) technique and immunocytochemistry for glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) were used to study the differentiation of pyramidal neurons and GABAergic inhibitory non-pyramidal cells in slice cultures of rat and mouse hippocampus. Golgi-impregnated and gold-toned cultures showed the characteristic curved structure of the Ammon's horn. Hippocampal regions CA1, CA3 and fascia dentata could easily be recognized. Pyramidal neurons in CA1 displayed all characteristics of this cell type known from Golgi studies in situ. A triangular cell body gives rise to a main apical dendritic shaft which gives off several side branches. Basal dendrites and the axon originate at the basal pole of the cell body. Apical and basal dendrites are densely covered with spines. As a characteristic feature of the cultured pyramidal cells, numerous spines were observed on the cell body. Most likely due to flattening of the slice during incubation, the pyramidal neurons in CA1 are no longer arranged in a densely packed layer. This results in more space between cell bodies which is filled in by numerous horizontal and basal dendrites originating from the pyramidal cell perikaryon. CA1 pyramidal neurons in slice cultures of the rat or mouse thus resemble the pyramidal neurons in the CA1 region of the primate hippocampus where a similar loose distribution of cell bodies is found. In the electron microscope, cell bodies and dendritic shafts of the gold-toned pyramidal cells formed symmetric synaptic contacts with presynaptic terminals. Numerous boutons were observed that established asymmetric synaptic contacts on gold-toned spines of peripheral pyramidal cell dendrites. This suggests that considerable synaptic reorganization takes place because in situ spines on peripheral dendritic segments are contacted mainly by extrinsic afferents. Like in situ, at least some of the terminals that establish symmetric synaptic contacts are GABAergic. In our immunocytochemical study we observed numerous GAD-positive terminals that formed a dense pericellular plexus around immunonegative cell bodies of pyramidal neurons. In the electron microscope these structures were identified as presynaptic boutons which formed symmetric synaptic contacts on cell bodies and dendritic shafts. They most likely originated from the GAD-positive neurons scattered in all layers of the slice culture. Our results have shown that the main cell types in the hippocampus, pyramidal neurons and GABAergic inhibitory non-pyramidal cells, survive and differentiate under the present culture conditions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)