Steroid receptor coactivators (SRCs) are important transcriptional modulators that regulate nuclear receptor and transcription factor activity to adjust transcriptional output to cellular demands. Highlighting their pleiotropic effects, dysfunction of the SRCs has been found in numerous pathologies including cancer, inflammation, and metabolic disorders. The SRC family is expressed strongly in the brain including the hippocampus, cortex, and hypothalamus. Studies focusing on the effect of SRC loss using congenic SRC knockout mice (SRC(-/-)) are limited in number, yet strongly indicate that the SRCs play important roles in regulating reproductive behavior, development, and motor coordination. To better understand the unique functions of the SRCs, we performed a neurobehavioral test battery focusing on anxiety and exploratory behaviors, motor coordination, sensorimotor gating, and nociception in both male and female null mice and compared them with their wild-type (WT) littermates. Results from the test battery reveal a role for SRC1 in motor coordination. Additionally, we found that SRC1 regulates anxiety responses in SRC1(-/-) male and female mice, and nociception sensitivity in SRC1(-/-) male but not female mice. By comparison, SRC2 regulates anxiety response with SRC2(-/-) females showing decreased anxiety in novel environments, as well as increased exploratory behavior in the open field compared with WT littermates. Additionally, SRC2(-/-) males were shown to have deficits in sensorimotor gating. Loss of SRC3 also shows sex differences in anxiety and exploratory behaviors. In particular, SRC3(-/-) female mice have increased anxiety and reduced exploratory activity and impairments in prepulse inhibition, whereas SRC3(-/-) male mice show no significant behavioral differences. In both genders, ablation of SRC3 decreases nocifensive behaviors. Collectively, these resource data suggest that loss of the SRCs results in behavioral phenotypes, underscoring the importance of understanding both the general and gender-based activity of SRCs in the brain.