It is reported that the amyloid-beta protein (Abeta)-induced impairments in synaptic plasticity coincide with memory decline and dementia. Although Abeta-induced inhibition of hippocampal long-term potentiation has been intensively investigated, the underlying mechanism of Abeta-enhanced long-term depression (LTD) is not clear. Here, we report that acute exposure of rat hippocampal slices to soluble Abeta-enhanced LTD induced by weak low-frequency stimulation (wLFS; 1Hz for 3 min, 180 pulses) in granule cells of the dentate gyrus. Application of LY341495 (a non-selective Group I/II metrabotropic glumate receptor (mGluR) antagonist) completely blocked Abeta-enhanced LTD, whereas D-AP5 (a not selective N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) antagonist) had no effect on Abeta-enhanced LTD compared with controls. In addition, Abeta-enhanced LTD was occluded by pre-application of 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine, a Group1 mGluR (mGluR1/5) agonist, suggesting Abeta-enhanced LTD depends on mGluR1/5 but not NMDAR. We also report here that p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK) inhibitor SB203580 and postsynaptic protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitors phenylarsine oxide and sodium orthovanadate prevented the facilitatory effect of Abeta on LTD. Application of striatal-enriched protein tyrosine phosphatase (STEP) activator MG132 facilitated induction of LTD by wLFS, but did not block following Abeta-enhanced LTD induced by another wLFS. On the other hand, Abeta-enhanced LTD blocked following MG132-LTD by wLFS, suggesting Abeta-enhanced hippocampal LTD involves STEP activation. Application of either non-selective caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK or caspase-3 selective inhibitor Z-DEVD-FMK prevented Abeta-enhanced LTD. However, neither the tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme inhibitor TAPI-2 nor the mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor rapamycin prevented the enhancement of Abeta on LTD. Therefore, we conclude that soluble Abeta enhances LTD in the hippocampal dentate gyrus region, and the facilitatory effect of Abeta on LTD involves mGluR1/5, p38MAPK, STEP and caspase-3 activation.