The parahippocampal areas including the subiculum, pre- and parasubiculum, and notably the entorhinal cortex (EC) are intimately involved in the generation of limbic seizures in temporal lobe epilepsy. We investigated changes in the expression of 10 major GABAA receptor subunit mRNAs in subfields of the ventral hippocampus, ventral subiculum, EC, and perirhinal cortex (PRC) at different intervals (1, 8, 30, and 90 days) after kainic acid (KA)-induced status epilepticus priming epileptogenesis in the rat. The most pronounced and ubiquitous changes were a transient (24 h after KA only) down-regulation of gamma2 mRNA and lasting decreases in subunit alpha5, beta3, and delta mRNAs that were prominent in all hippocampal and parahippocampal areas. In the subiculum similarly as in sectors CA1 and CA3, levels of subunit alpha1, alpha2, alpha4, and gamma2 mRNAs decreased transiently (1 day after KA-induced status epilepticus). They were followed by increased expression of subunit alpha1 and alpha3 mRNAs in the dentate gyrus (DG) and sectors CA1 and CA3, and subunit alpha1 also in the EC layer II (30 and 90 days after KA). We also observed sustained overexpression of subunits alpha4 and gamma2 in the subiculum and in the Ammon's horn. Subunit gamma2 mRNA was also increased in sector CA1 at the late intervals after KA. Taken together, our results suggest distinct regulation of mRNA expression for individual GABAA receptor subunits. Especially striking was the wide-spread down-regulation of the often peri- or extrasynaptically located subunits alpha5 and delta. These subunits are often associated with tonic inhibition. Their decrease could be related to decreased tonic inhibition or may merely reflect compensatory changes. In contrast, expression of subunit alpha4 that may also mediate tonic inhibition when associated with the delta-subunit was significantly upregulated in the DG and in the proximal subiculum at late intervals. Thus, concomitant up-regulation of subunit gamma2, alpha1 and alpha4 mRNAs (and loss in delta-subunits) ultimately indicates significant rearrangement of GABAA receptor composition after KA-induced seizures.