Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) function has been implicated in a number of physiological processes, including inflammatory responses, synaptic transmission, and synaptic plasticity in the brain. However, the specific role of COX-2 in exercise-induced neurogenesis is still debatable. Here, we assessed the role of COX-2 in exercise-induced plasticity by comparing COX-2 knockout mice to wild-type control littermates. We investigated the number of neural stem cells, and the degree of cell proliferation and neuronal differentiation in COX-2 knockout and its wild-type mice that either exercised or remained inactive. Wild-type and COX-2 knockout mice were put on a treadmill and were either sedentary or were forced to run 1 h/day for five consecutive days at a pace of 10-12 m/min for 5 weeks. Loss of COX-2 expression in the knockout mice was confirmed with two measures: (1) COX immunolabeling in the hippocampus, and (2) the identification of abnormal kidney development using hematoxylin and eosin staining, including subcapsular glomerular hypoplasia and hypertrophy of the deeper cortical glomeruli. Compared to wild-type mice, COX-2 knockout mice exhibited a significant reduction in the neural stem cells (nestin-positive cells), cell proliferation (Ki67-positive cells), and neuroblast differentiation (doublecortin-positive cells). In contrast, exercise significantly increased the neural stem cells, cell proliferation, and neuroblast differentiation in both the wild-type and COX-2 knockout mice although the NeuN-immunoreactive neurons were similar in all groups. Expression of phosphorylated cAMP-response element binding protein was decreased in knockout mice. Exercise increased its expression in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus in both wild-type and knockout mice. These results suggest that the COX-2 pathway is one of important factors on neural stem cells, cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation in sedentary mice. The ability of exercise to increase these types of neural plasticity, regardless of COX-2 signaling, suggests that the effects of exercise on neural stem cells, cell proliferation, and neuroblast differentiation are induced via a pathway that is independent of COX-2.