A monoclonal antibody against choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), the acetylcholine-synthesizing enzyme, was used to study cholinergic synapses on identified (Golgi stained) granule cells in the rat fascia dentata. Choline acetyltransferase immunocytochemistry was applied to 40-microns Vibratome sections cut perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the hippocampus. Light microscopy revealed fine varicose ChAT-immunoreactive axons in all layers of the fascia dentata, i.e., in the stratum moleculare, the stratum granulosum, and the subgranular polymorph zone. Most fibers were observed in the vicinity of granule cell bodies where they ran mainly parallel to the granular layer. Next, the immunostained Vibratome sections were sandwiched between small pieces of Parafilm and piled to form a block that was covered with agar and Golgi stained. After that, the sections were separated by cutting away the agar and removing the Parafilm. Sections containing well-impregnated granule cells were gold-toned (Fairen et al., '77), embedded in Araldite, and subjected to ultrathin sectioning for electron microscopy. A total of 14 gold-toned granule cells were examined in the electron microscope for synaptic contacts with cholinergic afferents. Choline acetyltransferase-immunoreactive axon terminals were observed that established symmetric synaptic contacts with the cell bodies and dendritic shafts of the gold-toned identified granule cells. Two types of contact were observed on spines arising from gold-toned granule cell dendrites. Immunoreactive terminals established asymmetric synaptic contacts with the head of small spines and symmetric contacts with the stalk of large, complex spines. The boutons forming asymmetric synaptic contacts with the cup-shaped spine head of the complex spines were not found to be immunoreactive. Our results demonstrate that cholinergic fibers to the rat fascia dentata establish characteristic types of synaptic contact with different postsynaptic elements of granule cells, suggesting a complex function of this afferent system.