The afferent-efferent connections of the pigeon dorsomedial forebrain, which is composed of the "hippocampus" (Hp) and "parahippocampus" (APH), presumed homologues of the mammalian hippocampal complex, were studied. Afferent projections were identified by wheat germ agglutinin-conjugated horseradish peroxidase (WGA-HRP) and efferent projections were identified by 3H-proline and WGA-HRP. In addition to identified intrinsic connections within Hp and APH, both Hp and APH were found to be in receipt of ipsilateral forebrain afferents from each other, the hyperstriatum accessorium, nucleus of the diagonal band, nucleus taeniae, and area corticoidea dorsolateralis. Only Hp received input from the contralateral Hp while only APH received input from the ipsilateral hyperstriatum dorsale and archistriatum, pars ventralis. Both Hp and APH received ipsilateral diencephalic afferents from the nucleus mamillaris lateralis, stratum cellulare internum, nucleus lateralis hypothalami, and nucleus paramedianus internus thalami. Only APH received bilateral input from the nucleus superficialis parvicellularis (this nucleus may send a small projection to Hp) and nucleus dorsolateralis anterior thalami, pars medialis, and an ipsilateral projection from the nucleus subrotundus. Brainstem afferents to Hp and APH included ipsilateral projections from the area ventralis (Tsai) nucleus reticularis pontis oralis, nucleus raphes, nucleus subceruleus dorsalis, and nucleus centralis superior of Bechterew, and bilateral projections from the nucleus linearis caudalis and locus ceruleus, of which the nucleus subceruleus dorsalis, nucleus centralis superior of Bechterew, and locus ceruleus projected to APH only. Forebrain efferents from both Hp and APH were found to project ipsilaterally to the septum, the area of the fasciculus diagonalis Brocae, nucleus taeniae, and area corticoidea dorsolateralis. Only Hp appeared to send efferents to the contralateral septum and Hp, while only APH sent efferents to the hyperstriatum dorsale and the archistriatum. A hypothalamic projection from Hp and APH was found to partially terminate near the nucleus mamillaris lateralis. At the level of pathway connections, the results demonstrate a striking similarity between the avian dorsomedial forebrain and the dorsomedial cortex of reptiles and the mammalian hippocampus.