The trajectories and telencephalic terminal fields of neurons within the area ventralis of Tsai (AVT) and nucleus tegmenti pedunculopontinus pars compacta (TPc) were determined in the pigeon by using amino acid autoradiography and horseradish peroxidase histochemistry. Previous histochemical studies have considered these cell groups comparable to the A10 and A9 components of the mammalian nigral complex. The results show the efferents derived from these cell groups ascend to the telencephalon via the medial and lateral forebrain bundles, ansa lenticularis, and quintofrontal and occipitomesencephalic tracts. All projections are bilateral and symmetrical, although projections to the contralateral hemisphere are extremely sparse. Within the telencephalon many cell fields receive projections from the AVT and TPc nuclei; however, the most substantial projections reach structures within the basal telencephalon, especially the paleostriatal complex. Within the paleostriatal complex the paleostriatum augmentatum (PA) receives a very heavy projection from the TPc. AVT projections reach primarily rostromedial portions of PA as well as the lobus parolfactorius. The large-celled portions of the paleostriatum including the paleostriatum primitivum and nucleus intrapeduncularis do not appear to receive projections from either AVT or TPc neurons. Projections from AVT and TPc neurons terminate within other structures of the basal telencephalon including the lateral and medial septal nuclei, the olfactory tubercle, the ventral paleostriatum and the preoptic area. Pallial derivatives including the hyperstriatum dorsale, hyperstriatum ventrale, dorsal archistriatum, and hippocampus also receive projections from AVT and TPc neurons, although these projections are much sparser than those reaching subpallial structures. Large portions of the telencephalon including the hyperstriatum accessorium, most of the hyperstriatum ventrale, much of the archistriatum, and much of the neostriatum do not receive projections from AVT or TPc neurons. Furthermore, there is substantial overlap between the telencephalic projections of TPc and AVT neurons, as well as considerable overlap between the projections of both these nigral cell groups and the projections of the locus coeruleus complex in the pigeon. This high degree of overlap between locus coeruleus and nigral telencephalic terminal fields is quite different from the condition in mammals and suggests possible functional divergence for some of these pathways in contemporary amniote forms.