BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Hemodynamic normality is crucial to maintaining the integrity of cerebral vessels and, therefore, preserving the cognitive functions of Alzheimer's disease patients. This study investigates the implications of the hemodynamic changes and the neuropathological diversifications of AlCl3-induced AD. METHODS: The experimental animals were 8- to 12-wk-old male Wistar rats. The rats were randomly divided into 2 groups: a control group and a (+)control group. Food intake, water intake, and weight changes were recorded daily for 22 wk. Synchronously, the regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) of the rats with AlCl3-induced AD were measured using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The hemorheological parameters were analyzed using a computerized auto-rotational rheometer. The brain tissue of the subjects was analyzed using immunohistological chemical (IHC) staining to determine the beta-amyloid (Abeta) levels. RESULTS: The results of hemodynamic analysis revealed that the whole blood viscosity (WBV), fibrinogen, plasma viscosity and RBC aggregation index (RAI) in (+)control were significantly higher than that of control group, while erythrocyte electrophoresis (EI) of whole blood in (+)control were significantly lower than that of control group. The results of acetylcholinesterase-RBC (AChE-RBC)in the (+)control group was significantly higher than that of the control group. The results also show that the reduction of rCBF in rats with AlCl3-induced AD was approximately 50% to 60% that of normal rats. IHC stain results show that significantly more Abeta plaques accumulated in the hippocampus and cortex of the (+)control than in the control group. CONCLUSION: The results accentuate the importance of hemorheology and reinforce the specific association between hemodynamic and neuropathological changes in rats with AlCl3-induced AD. Hemorheological parameters, such as WBV and fibrinogen, and AChE-RBC were ultimately proven to be useful biomarkers of the severity and progression of AD patients. In addition, the parameters can be substituted for invasive inspection in therapeutic intervention.