Early life stress can permanently alter functioning of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which regulates the stress response and influences the perception of pain. Chronic pelvic pain patients commonly report having experienced childhood neglect or abuse, which increases the likelihood of presenting with comorbid chronic pain and/or mood disorders. Animal models of neonatal stress commonly display enhanced anxiety-like behaviors, colorectal hypersensitivity, and disruption of proper neuro-immune interactions in adulthood. Here, we tested the hypothesis that early life stress impacts vaginal sensitivity by exposing mice to neonatal maternal separation (NMS) for 3h/day during the first two (NMS14) or three (NMS21) postnatal weeks. As adults, female mice underwent vaginal balloon distension (VBD), which was also considered an acute stress. Before or after VBD, mice were assessed for anxiety-like behavior, hindpaw sensitivity, and changes in gene and protein expression related to HPA axis function and regulation. NMS21 mice displayed significantly increased vaginal sensitivity compared to naive mice, as well as significantly reduced anxiety-like behavior at baseline, which was heightened following VBD. NMS21 mice exhibited significant thermal and mechanical hindpaw hypersensitivity at baseline and following VBD. NMS14 mice displayed no change in anxiety-like behavior and only exhibited significantly increased hindpaw mechanical and thermal sensitivity following VBD. Centrally, a significant decrease in negative regulation of the HPA axis was observed in the hypothalamus and hippocampus of NMS21 mice. Peripherally, NMS and VBD affected the expression of inflammatory mediators in the vagina and bladder. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) receptor and transient receptor potential (TRP) channel protein expression was also significantly, and differentially, affected in vagina, bladder, and colon by both NMS and VBD. Together these data indicate that NMS affects both central and peripheral aspects of the HPA axis, which may drive changes in vaginal sensitivity and the development of comorbid chronic pain and mood disorders.