Methylmercury (MeHg) and prenatal stress (PS) are risk factors for neurotoxicity that may co-occur in human populations. Because they also share biological substrates and can produce common behavioral deficits, this study examined their joint effects on behavioral and neurochemical effects in male and female rats. Dams had access to 0, 0.5 or 2.5ppm MeHg chloride drinking water from two to three weeks prior to breeding through weaning. Half of the dams in each of these treatment groups also underwent PS on gestational days 16-17. This yielded 6 groups/gender: 0-NS, 0-PS, 0.5-NS, 0.5-PS, 2.5-NS, and 2.5-PS. Behavioral testing began in young adulthood and included fixed interval (FI) schedule-controlled behavior, novel object recognition (NOR) and locomotor activity, behaviors previously demonstrated to be sensitive to MeHg and/or mediated by brain mesocorticolimbic dopamine glutamate systems targeted by both MeHg and PS. Behavioral deficits were more pronounced in females and included impaired NOR recognition memory only under conditions of combined MeHg and PS, while non-monotonic reductions in FI response rates occurred, with greatest effects at the 0.5ppm concentration; the less reduced 2.5ppm FI response rates were further reduced under conditions of PS (2.5-PS). Correspondingly, many neurochemical changes produced by MeHg were only seen under conditions of PS, particularly in striatum in males and in hippocampus and nucleus accumbens in females, regions of significance to the mediation of FI and NOR performance. Collectively these findings demonstrate sex-dependent and non-monotonic effects of developmental MeHg exposure that can be unmasked or enhanced by PS, particularly for behavioral outcomes in females, but for both sexes in neurochemical changes, that were observed at MeHg exposure concentrations that did not influence either reproductive outcomes or maternal behavior. Thus, assessment of risks associated with MeHg may be underestimated in the absence of other extant risk factors with which it may share common substrates and effects.