Previous studies have shown that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) has the potential to cause cognitive dysfunction. However, the underlying pathogenesis has yet to be fully elucidated. Increasing attention is being focused on infection in the central nervous system. Therefore, the present study aimed to investigate the behavioral performance of rats receiving intraperitoneal injections of LPS and to determine the expression levels of amyloid-beta (Abeta), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and pro-inflammatory cytokines in the hippocampus. In total, 30 male Wistar rats were randomly divided into 3 groups (each n=10): Control and 3 and 7 day LPS administration groups. The rats were intraperitoneally injected with saline or LPS for 3 or 7 days. Following this, rats performed the Morris water maze test, in which the latency to the platform and proportion of time spent in the target quadrant were recorded. Rats were then sacrificed and the hippocampi were harvested for determination of interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), Abeta and BDNF expression levels. LPS administration for 3 and 7 days significantly increased the latency to the platform and decreased the proportion of time spent in the target quadrant compared with those in the control group, (P<0.05). Administration of LPS for 3 and 7 days induced statistically significant increases in the expression levels of IL-1beta, IL-6 and TNF-alpha in the hippocampus, compared with those in the control group (P<0.05). Additionally, the administration of LPS for 7 days induced a statistically significant increase in the expression level of Abeta in the hippocampus, compared with that in the control group (P<0.05). However, the administration of LPS did not elicit a statistically significant change in the expression level of BDNF in the hippocampus, compared with that in the control group (P>0.05). The results indicate that LPS induces cognitive dysfunction, which is associated with increased expression levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and Abeta, but does not affect the expression of BDNF in the hippocampus.