Slices of isolated olfactory cortex from guinea-pig have been used to study the action of adenosine at synapses between axons of the lateral olfactory tract and neurons in the olfactory cortex. Adenosine depressed the excitatory postsynaptic potential, and, with paired or multiple stimuli, the reduced excitatory postsynaptic potentials in adenosine showed more synaptic facilitation. Very small excitatory postsynaptic potentials which were estimated not to be affected by postsynaptic membrane conductance changes were highly sensitive to adenosine. Both observations indicate a presynaptic action of adenosine. To test whether a conductance increase to potassium ions mediated adenosine action, the K-channel blockers, 3,4-diaminopyridine (1-100 mumol/l) or 4-aminopyridine (100-500 mumol/l) were applied or Cs partially substituted for K. These substances reduced or prevented adenosine from having its depressant effect on synaptic transmission. These particular K-channel blockers also prolonged the action potential propagating along the lateral olfactory tract. When the increased excitability was counteracted by high Mg or low concentrations of tetrodotoxin, 3,4-diaminopyridine still blocked adenosine action. UO2 ions prolonged the lateral olfactory tract action potential without blockade of K-conductance, but still supported an adenosine depression of the excitatory postsynaptic potential. Veratridine also supported the adenosine depression. These observations suggest that the action of 3,4-diaminopyridine on adenosine was not solely the result of increased tissue excitability. In contrast, tetraethylammonium (20 mmol/l), Ba (0.5-4 mmol/l) or Rb replacement for K had a negligible effect on the duration of the presynaptic action potential and had no effect on the depressant action of adenosine. These data are compatible with the idea that adenosine enhances an aminopyridine-sensitive potassium conductance in nerve terminals and changes in Ca influx are consequential to this.