Cardiac arrest (CA) triggers neuroinflammation that could play a role in a delayed neuronal death. In our previously established rat model of ventricular fibrillation (VF) CA characterized by extensive neuronal death, we tested the hypothesis that individual brain regions have specific neuroinflammatory responses, as reflected by regional brain tissue levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)alpha and other cytokines. In a prospective study, rats were randomized to 6min (CA6), 8min (CA8) or 10min (CA10) of VF CA, or sham group. Cortex, striatum, hippocampus and cerebellum were evaluated for TNFalpha and interleukin (IL)-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12 and interferon gamma at 3h, 6h or 14 d after CA by ELISA and Luminex. Immunohistochemistry was used to determine the cell source of TNFalpha. CA resulted in a selective TNFalpha response with significant regional and temporal differences. At 3h after CA, TNFalpha-levels increased in all regions depending on the duration of the insult. The most pronounced increase was observed in striatum that showed 20-fold increase in CA10 vs. sham, and 3-fold increase vs. CA6 or CA8 group, respectively (p<0.01). TNFalpha levels in striatum decreased between 3h and 6h, but increased in other regions between 3h and 14 d. TNFalpha levels remained twofold higher in CA6 vs. shams across brain regions at 14 d (p<0.01). In contrast to pronounced TNFalpha response, other cytokines showed only a minimal increase in CA6 and CA8 groups vs. sham in all brain regions with the exception that IL-1beta increased twofold in cerebellum and striatum (p<0.01). TNFalpha colocalized with neurons. In conclusion, CA produced a duration-dependent acute TNFalpha response, with dramatic increase in the striatum where TNFalpha colocalized with neurons. Increased TNFalpha levels persist for at least two weeks. This TNFalpha surge contrasts the lack of an acute increase in other cytokines in brain after CA. Given that striatum is a selectively vulnerable brain region, our data suggest possible role of neuronal TNFalpha in striatum after CA and identify therapeutic targets for future experiments. This study was approved by the University of Pittsburgh IACUC 1002340A-3.