The maturation and growth of fetal serotonergic raphe neurons have been studied immunohistochemically and biochemically between 1 week and 5 months after grafting to the hippocampal formation in 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine-pretreated adult rats. The average number of surviving neurons in each group was 1800, which is equivalent to approximately 20% of the potential number of serotonin neurons contained in the grafted cell suspension. The fetal raphe cells, which were taken from 12-14-day-old embryos, had developed strong serotonin immunoreactivity at 1 week after transplantation, and the number of serotonin cells present at 1 week was similar to that found at later time points. Fiber outgrowth was demonstrable already at 1 week but the serotonin-positive fibers were restricted to the areas close to the graft. Single fibers, however, could be traced for distances of up to 500-800 microns into the host hippocampus and dentate gyrus. At later time points, the graft-derived serotonin-immunoreactive fiber network extended to cover the entire hippocampal formation. At the longest postoperative time point, 7 weeks and 5 months, some of the animals exhibited extensive hyperinnervation patterns throughout the dorsal parts of the hippocampus and the dentate gyrus. Consistent with these immunohistochemical observations, supranormal serotonin levels developed with time after transplantation in the grafted hippocampi from an average of 5% of normal at 1 week, to 28% of normal at 3 weeks, 146% of normal at 7 weeks, and 216% of normal at 5 months. Although the recovery of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) paralleled that of serotonin (5-HT), the increase in the metabolite concentrations was less than that of the amine, indicating a change in the turnover or metabolism of serotonin in the grafted neurons over time. Thus, the 5-HIAA:5-HT ratio was higher than normal at 3 weeks post-grafting (when the host hippocampus was only partially reinnervated); it was similar to normal at 7 weeks, and it tended to be lower than normal in the hyperinnervated specimens at 5 months' survival. A regression analysis revealed a significant inverse correlation between the hippocampal 5-HT concentration and the 5-HIAA:5-HT ratio in the graft-reinnervated hippocampal formation. In conclusion, the grafted serotonergic raphe neurons, in contrast to other types of aminergic neurons, exhibited a prominent tendency to form extensive hyperiinnervation patterns in the previously dennervated host target.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)