Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is one of the most common forms of drug-resistant, localization-related epilepsies in humans. One potential therapeutic target is the brain glutamine-glutamate-GABA metabolic pathway, which is perturbed in patients with MTLE. Loss of glutamine synthetase (GS) in astrocytes may be critically involved in this perturbation, which can be modeled by infusing the GS inhibitor methionine sulfoximine (MSO) into the entorhinal-hippocampal area in rats. Because 5-aminovaleric acid (5-AV) has been implicated in modulation of the glutamine-glutamate-GABA metabolic pathway, we hypothesized that 5-AV would alter the expression of seizures in the MSO model of MTLE. Male Sprague Dawley rats (300-330g) were implanted with an Alzet pump placed subcutaneously in the abdominal region to release either 5-AV (0.05mg/mL, n=6) or phosphate buffered saline (PBS, n=6) at a rate of 2.5mul/h over 28days. Five to 7days after surgery, all rats were implanted with an intracranial pump infusing MSO (2.5mg/mL; 0.25mul/h) unilaterally into the hippocampal formation. Following the second surgery, intracranial EEG was measured from the left and right hemispheres above the dorsal hippocampal formations for a continuous period of 21days. The EEG was correlated with simultaneous video recordings to determine the stage of seizures according to a modified Racine scale. Five-AV-treated rats experienced a 3.5 fold reduction in the number of seizures (6.7+/-1.4seizures/day) than PBS-treated rats (23.2+/-6.3seizures/day) during the first 2days following MSO pump placement (p<0.005). Both groups showed similar seizure frequency over days 3-21 (~1seizure/day). However, the fraction of the most severe type of seizures (Racine stages 4 and 5) increased over time in the PBS treated group, but not in the 5-AV treated group. Notably, 5-AV treated rats experienced a 2.3 and 2.6 fold lower fraction of stage 4 and 5 seizures than PBS-treated rats during the 2nd and 3rd weeks of MSO treatment respectively (p<0 .05 and p<0.001 respective to week). Five-AV markedly reduces the number of seizures initially and suppresses the development of the most severe type of seizures in the MSO model of MTLE. These results may have implications for the therapeutic use of 5-AV in treating mesial temporal lobe seizures and for our understanding of the chemical pathology of epileptogenesis and MTLE.