We have examined the distribution pattern and the density of various neuropeptide, neurotransmitter and enzyme containing neurons in the rat medial septum and the nucleus of the diagonal band of Broca to assess their possible involvement in the septohippocampal, septocortical and septobulbar pathways. Immunohistochemical methods were combined with the retrograde transport of a protein-gold complex injected in the hippocampus, the cingulate cortex or the olfactory bulb. Cholinergic neurons were the most numerous. Galanin-positive neurons were about two or three times less numerous than cholinergic cells. Both these cell types had a similar location though the choline acetyl transferase-like immunoreactive cells extended more caudally in the horizontal limb of the nucleus of the diagonal band of Broca. Immunoreactive cells for other neuroactive substances were few (calcitonin gene-related peptide, luteinizing hormone releasing hormone. [Met]enkephalin-arg-gly-leu) or occasional (dynorphin B, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, somatostatin, neurotensin, cholecystokinin, neuropeptide Y and substance P). No immunoreactive cells for bombesin, alpha atrial natriuretic factor, corticotropin releasing factor, 5-hydroxytryptamine, melanocyte stimulating hormone, oxytocin, prolactin, tyrosine hydroxylase or arg-vasopressin were present. Choline acetyltransferase- and galanin-like immunoreactive cells densely participate to septal efferents. Cholinergic neurons constituted the bulk of septal efferent neurons. Galanin-positive cells were 22% of septohippocampal, 8% of septocortical, and 9% of septobulbar neurons. Galanin containing septohippocampal neurons were found in the medial septum and the nucleus of the diagonal band of Broca; galanin-positive septobulbar and septocortical cells were limited to the nucleus of the diagonal band of Broca. Occasional double-labellings were noticed with some peptides other than galanin. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone, calcitonin gene-related peptide and enkephalin were the most often observed; some other projecting cells stained for vasoactive intestinal polypeptide or dynorphin B. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone, calcitonin gene-related peptide and enkephalin were observed in septohippocampal neurons; luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone and vasoactive intestinal peptide were observed in septocortical neurons and calcitonin gene-related peptide, luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone and dynorphin B were observed in septo-bulbar cells. These results show that, in addition to acetylcholine, galanin is a major cellular neuroactive substance in septal projections to the hippocampus, the cingulate cortex and the olfactory bulb. The presence of septal projecting neurons immunoreactive for other peptides shows that a variety of distinct peptides may also participate, but in a smaller number, to septal efferent pathways.