Extracellular levels of serotonin (5-HT) and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) were monitored by microdialysis in the hippocampal formation previously denervated of its serotonergic input by an intraventricular injection of 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine (5,7-DHT), and in 5,7-DHT denervated hippocampi reinnervated by grafted fetal rat serotonin neurons. Two weeks after 5,7-DHT lesion, baseline 5-HT release was reduced to levels below detection, and KCl- and p-chloro-amphetamine-evoked release was reduced by 90-95%. In the chronically denervated hippocampus (3 months after lesion), baseline 5-HT release had recovered to near-normal levels, but KCl- and p-chloroamphetamine-evoked release remained severely impaired. Addition of the 5-HT re-uptake blocker indalpine to the perfusion medium induced a 5-6-fold increase in serotonin overflow in the normal hippocampus, while the serotonin overflow in the 5,7-DHT denervated hippocampus remained unaffected. The intrahippocampal fetal raphe transplants restored 5-HT release to near-normal levels, not only under baseline conditions but also in the presence of re-uptake blockade. Both KCl- and p-chloroamphetamine-induced release had recovered in the grafted hippocampus and the responses were even greater than those seen in normal animals. In both normal and grafted hippocampus addition of the sodium channel blocker tetrodotoxin reduced 5-HT overflow to the level seen in the denervated hippocampus. The new hippocampal serotonin innervation, established by the grafts, was markedly denser than normal, and the tissue 5-HT and 5-HIAA levels were 3-4-fold higher than normal in the grafted hippocampi. The 5-HIAA level in the perfusate collected from the grafted hippocampi showed a similar increase above normal, whereas 5-HT release was maintained within the normal range, both under baseline conditions and in the presence of re-uptake blockade. The results indicate that the grafted serotonergic raphe neurons are spontaneously active at the synaptic level, despite their ectopic location. The ability of the grafted neurons to maintain 5-HT release within the normal range suggests that local regulatory mechanisms at the terminal level can compensate for abnormalities in the graft-derived innervation density.