The intracerebral microdialysis technique has been used to monitor extracellular levels of noradrenaline, 5-hydroxytryptamine and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid in the rat hippocampus in vivo in response to focal and generalized seizures induced by hippocampal kindling stimulation. In fully kindled animals a stimulus-induced generalized seizure gave rise to a three-fold increase of noradrenaline levels in the stimulated hippocampus as compared to baseline levels (15-min samples). The maximal increase of noradrenaline levels occurred within the first minutes after onset of seizure activity, as assessed in 2-min sample fractions with the noradrenaline uptake blocker desipramine added to the perfusion medium. After the peak increase, the noradrenaline levels tapered off, reaching baseline after 8-10 min. In 6-hydroxydopamine-treated animals, baseline noradrenaline levels were markedly reduced and there was no significant increase in noradrenaline release in response to a generalized seizure. These data support the hypothesis that the high extracellular levels of noradrenaline measured in seizures are of neuronal origin. There were no significant changes in extracellular 5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid levels after a generalized seizure. In non-kindled animals the steady state noradrenaline levels during uptake blockade were two-three times higher than in the kindled rats. However, the peak noradrenaline levels measured in both hippocampi after the first two electrical kindling stimulations giving rise to focal epileptiform activity (afterdischarge) were similar to those observed in the kindled animals in response to generalized seizures. The increase of noradrenaline release in the non-kindled animals was significantly correlated to the duration of afterdischarge. In conclusion, the present study demonstrates the usefulness of the intracerebral dialysis technique for monitoring noradrenaline, 5-hydroxytryptamine and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid release during seizures. The results indicate that both focal and generalized hippocampal seizures evoked by electrical kindling stimulation lead to a marked increase of transmitter release from noradrenergic but not from serotonergic neurons in the hippocampus. The ability of the noradrenergic system to respond by increased transmitter release to epileptic seizures is thus retained also in the kindled state.