Immunocytochemical methods, both light and electron microscopic, were used to identify the cellular and subcellular locations of octadecaneuropeptide-like immunoreactivity (ODN-LI) in rat brains serially sectioned in total. ODN-LI includes a newly discovered family of rat brain neuropeptides that are processing products of a common endogenous neuropeptide precursor, diazepam binding inhibitor (DBI). The members of this neuropeptide family have been shown to displace benzodiazepines and beta carbolines from their specific recognition sites located on the allosteric modulatory centers of GABAA receptors. We have previously examined the distribution of DBI-LI in rat brain. The anti-ODN antiserum used in this study does not cross-react with rat DBI, and thus allows a distinct analysis of ODN-LI as opposed to DBI-LI, in rat brain. Neuronal perikarya with ODN-LI were located in many brain nuclei, such as the pontine n., reticular thalamic n., subgeniculate n., supraoptic n. and suprachiasmatic n., and also in brain areas such as cerebral and cerebellar cortex, hippocampus, inferior colliculus, olfactory bulb and subiculum. In addition to perikaryal labelling, a punctate or diffuse immunostaining with ODN antibodies was detected in many brain regions such as cerebellum, hippocampus, amygdaloid area, olfactory tubercle, some of the deep cerebellar nuclei and some circumventricular organs. At the electron microscopic level ODN-LI was identified in neuronal perikarya, processes and terminals. In the axon terminals, ODN-LI appears to be associated with synaptic vesicles. Whenever ODN-LI was detected within neurons, DBI-LI was also found in identical cells. In addition to neurons, DBI-LI was found in glia or glial-like cells, while ODN-LI was not found in these cells. Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that ODN may be a neuron-specific processing product of DBI and that ODN-like peptides may act as putative endogenous allosteric modulators of various GABAA receptor subtypes.