BushenYizhi formula (BSYZ), a traditional Chinese medicine formula consisting of six herbs has been reported to possess a neuroprotective effect. The present study aimed to investigate the effects of BSYZ on learning and memory abilities, as well as oxidative stress and neuronal apoptosis in the hippocampus of scopolamine (SCOP)induced senescence in mice, in order to reveal whether BSYZ is a potential therapeutic agent for Alzheimer's disease (AD). A highperformance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fingerprint was applied to provide a chemical profile of BSYZ. Extracts of BSYZ were orally administered to mice with SCOPinduced memory impairment for two weeks. The learning and memory abilities were determined by the Morris water maze test. The oxidant stressrelated indices, such as activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and levels of glutathione (GSH) and malondialdehyde (MDA) were examined in hippocampus of SCOPtreated mice. The cell death ratio was assessed by TUNEL staining, while apoptoticrelated proteins including Bcl2 and Bax were determined by immuno-fluorescent staining and western blot analysis. Caspase3 was determined by western blot analysis. Consequently, a chromatographic condition, which was conducted at 35 C with a flow rate of 0.8 ml/min on the Gemini C18 column with mobile phase of acetonitrile and waterphosphoric acid (100:0.1, v/v), was established to yield common fingerprint chromatography under 203 nm with a similarity index of 0.986 within 10 batches of BSYZ samples. BSYZ at a dose of 2.92 g/kg significantly improved the cognitive ability, restored the abnormal activity of SOD and increased the levels of MDA and GSH induced by SCOP. Moreover, the neural apoptosis in the hippocampus of SCOPtreated mice was reversed by BSYZ by regulating the expression of Bcl2, Bax and caspase3. The results demonstrated that BSYZ had neuroprotective effects in SCOPinduced senescence in mice by ameliorating oxidative stress and neuronal apoptosis in the brain, supporting its potential in AD treatment.