BACKGROUND: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs, including alpha, beta and gamma subtypes) and their agonists have a protective role in treatment of central nervous system (CNS) diseases. The present study was designed to investigate the expression changes of PPAR-alpha, -beta, -gamma and NF-kappa B in the hippocampus of rats with global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury (GCIRI) after treatment with agonists or antagonists of PPAR-gamma. METHODS: A rat GCIRI model was established by occlusion of bilateral common carotid arteries and cervical vena retransfusion. GW9662 (5 mug), a selective PPAR- gamma antagonist, was intraventricularly injected at 0.5 h before GCIR; Rosiglitazone (0.8, 2.4 and 7.2 mg/kg), a selective PPAR- gamma agonist, was injected intraperitoneally at 1 h before GCIRI. The expression changes of PPAR-alpha, -beta and -gamma at mRNA and protein levels were detected by RT-PCR and western blotting. The changes of spatial learning and memory (SLM) functions were assessed by using a Morris water maze; the pathohistological changes of hippocampal neurons were evaluated by hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining; the contents of IL-1, IL-6, IL-10 and TNF-alpha, and the NF- kappa B expression were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and immunohistochemical staining. The superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and malondialdehyde (MDA) content were also detected. RESULTS: The SLM function and hippocampal neurons were significantly impaired after the occurrence of GCIRI. The MDA, IL-1, IL-6, IL-10, TNF-alpha content and expression of PPARs increased significantly, but the SOD activity and NF-kappa B expression were weakened in the hippocampus. Rosiglitazone treatment significantly protected rats from SLM function impairment and neuron death, and resulted in higher expressions of SOD activity and NF-kappa B, but lower contents of MDA and inflammatory factors. After treatment with rosiglitazone or GW9662, no significant change in PPAR-alpha or -beta expression was detected. CONCLUSIONS: Rosiglitazone, a PPAR-gamma agonist, plays a protective role in hippocampal neuron damage of GCIRI rats by inhibiting the oxidative stress response and inflammation. The activation or antagonism of PPAR-gamma did not affect the expression of PPAR-alpha or -beta, indicating that the three subtypes of PPARs act in independent pathways in the CNS.