OBJECTIVE: The Genetic Absence Epilepsy Rats from Strasbourg (GAERS) is a genetic model, derived from Wistar rats by selective breeding. In all previous studies, GAERS were compared to their paired selected strain not expressing spike-and-wave discharges (SWDs), namely nonepileptic controls (NECs). Because the occurrence/absence of SWDs is of polygenic origin, some other traits could have been selected along with occurrence/absence of SWDs. Therefore, we explored the importance of using a second control group consisting in Wistar rats, the strain of origin of GAERS, in addition to NECs, on locomotion and anxiety in GAERS. METHODS: A test battery encompassing home-cage, open-field, beam-walking and elevated plus-maze evaluations was used. In addition, stereologic analyses were performed to assess the volume of thalamus, amygdala, and hippocampus. The occurrence/absence of SWDs was determined in all three strains by electroencephalography (EEG) recording. RESULTS: When compared to NECs and Wistars, GAERS displayed lower exploratory activity and fastened habituation to novelty. In the plus-maze, scores of GAERS and Wistars were similar, but NECs appeared significantly less anxious (possibly in association with increased amygdala volume); evidence for weaker anxiety in NECs was also found in the open-field evaluation. The volumetric study revealed increased thalamic volume in GAERS compared to both control groups. SWDs were present in all GAERS and in 80% of Wistars. SIGNIFICANCE: Compared to the original Wistar strain as an additional control group, the selective breeding that generated the GAERS has no incidence on anxiety-related behavior, conversely to the selection of SWD suppression in NECs, in which anxiety is attenuated. These findings point to the importance of using a second control group composed of Wistar rats in studies characterizing the behavioral profile of GAERS. Thereby, possible confusions between occurrence/absence of SWDs and other features that come along with selection and/or differential brain development induced by the genetic mutations are reduced.