BACKGROUND: Depression in the context of bipolar disorder (BD) is often misdiagnosed as major depressive disorder (MDD), leading to mistreatments and poor clinical outcomes for many bipolar patients. Previous neuroimaging studies found mixed results on brain structure, and biochemical metabolism of the two disorders. To eliminate the compounding effects of medication, and aging, this study sought to investigate the brain biochemical changes of treatment-naive, non-late-life patients with MDD and BD in white matter in prefrontal (WMP) lobe, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and hippocampus by using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H-MRS). METHODS: Three groups of participants were recruited: 26 MDD patients, 20 depressed BD patients, and 13 healthy controls. The multi-voxel (1)H-MRS [repetition time (TR)=1000ms; echo-time (TE)=144ms] was used for the measurement of N-acetylaspartate(NAA), choline containg compounds (Cho), and creatine (Cr) in three brain locations: white matter in prefrontal (WMP) lobe, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and hippocampus. Two ratios of NAA/Cr and Cho/Cr as a measure of brain biochemical changes were compared among three experimental groups. RESULTS: On the comparison of brain biochemical changes, both MDD patients and BD patients showed many similarities compared to the controls. They both had a significantly lower NAA/Cr ratio in the left WMP lobe. There were no significant differences among three experimental groups for Cho/Cr ratio in the WMP lobe, and for the ratios of NAA/Cr and Cho/Cr in the bilateral ACC and hippocampus. The only difference between MDD and BD patients existed for the NAA/Cr ratio in the right WMP lobe. While MDD patients had a significantly lower NAA/Cr ratio than controls, BD patients showed no such differences. On the comparison of correlation of medical variables and brain biochemical changes, all participants demonstrated no significant correlations. CONCLUSION: Reduced NAA/Cr ratio at the left WMP lobe indicated the dysfunction of neuronal viability in deep white matter, in both MDD and BD patients who shared similarities of brain biochemical abnormalities, which might imply an overlap in neuropathology of depression.