OBJECTIVE: Resective surgery for mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) with a correspondent lesion has been established as an effective and safe procedure. Surgery for temporal lobe epilepsies with bilateral hippocampal sclerosis or without correspondent lesions, however, carries a higher risk of devastating memory decline, underscoring the importance of establishing the memory-dominant side preoperatively and adopting the most appropriate procedure. In this study, we focused on high gamma activities (HGAs) in the parahippocampal gyri and investigated the relationship between memory-related HGAs and memory outcomes after hippocampal transection (HT), a hippocampal counterpart to neocortical multiple subpial transection. The transient nature of memory worsening after HT provided us with a rare opportunity to compare HGAs and clinical outcomes without risking permanent memory disorders. METHODS: We recorded electrocorticography from parahippocampal gyri of 18 patients with temporal lobe epilepsy while they executed picture naming and recognition tasks. Memory-related HGA was quantified by calculating differences in power amplification of electrocorticography signals in a high gamma range (60-120 Hz) between the two tasks. We compared memory-related HGAs from correctly recognized and rejected trials (hit-HGA and reject-HGA). Using hit-HGA, we determined HGA-dominant sides and compared them with memory outcomes after HT performed on seven patients. RESULTS: We observed memory-related HGA mainly between 500 and 600 msec poststimulus. Hit-HGA was significantly higher than reject-HGA. Three patients who had surgery on the HGA-dominant side experienced transient memory worsening postoperatively. The postoperative memory functions of the other four patients remained unchanged. SIGNIFICANCE: Parahippocampal HGA was indicated to reflect different memory processes and be compatible with the outcomes of HT, suggesting that HGA could provide predictive information on whether the mesial temporal lobe can be resected without causing memory worsening. This preliminary study suggests a refined surgical strategy for atypical MTLE based on reliable memory lateralization.