BACKGROUND: Modulation of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors (GABAARs) by general anesthetics may contribute to their ability to produce amnesia. Receptors containing alpha5 subunits, which mediate tonic and slow synaptic inhibition, are co-localized with beta3 and gamma2 subunits in dendritic layers of the hippocampus and are sensitive to low (amnestic) concentrations of anesthetics. Because alpha5 and beta3 subunits influence performance in hippocampus-dependent learning tasks in the presence and absence of general anesthetics, and the experimental inhaled drug 1,2-dichlorohexafluorocyclobutane (F6) impairs hippocampus-dependent learning, we hypothesized that F6 would modulate receptors that incorporate alpha5 and beta3 subunits. We hypothesized further that the beta3(N265M) mutation, which controls receptor modulation by general anesthetics, would similarly influence modulation by F6. METHODS: Using whole-cell electrophysiologic recording techniques, we tested the effects of F6 at concentrations ranging from 4 to 16 muM on receptors expressed in human embryonic kidney 293 cells. We measured drug modulation of wild-type alpha5beta3 and alpha5beta3gamma2L GABAARs and receptors harboring the beta3(N265M) mutation. We also tested the effects of F6 on alpha1beta2gamma2L receptors, which were reported previously to be insensitive to this drug when expressed in Xenopus oocytes. RESULTS: F6 enhanced the responses of wild-type alpha5beta3gamma2L but not alpha1beta2gamma2L receptors to low concentrations of GABA in a concentration-dependent manner. Receptors that incorporated the mutant beta3(N265M) subunit were insensitive to F6. When applied together with a high concentration of GABA, F6 blocked currents through alpha5beta3 but not alpha5beta3gamma2L receptors. F6 did not alter deactivation of alpha5beta3gamma2L receptors after brief high- concentration pulses of GABA. CONCLUSIONS: The nonimmobilizer F6 modulates GABAARs in a manner that depends on subunit composition and mode of receptor activation by GABA, supporting a possible role for alpha5-containing receptors in suppression of learning and memory by F6. Furthermore, common structural requirements indicate that similar molecular mechanisms may be responsible for the enhancing effects of F6 and conventional general anesthetics.