Ethylcholine aziridinium (AF64A) has been proposed as a specific cholinergic neurotoxin. In earlier studies, using AF64A, we reported that slow infusion of 1-2 nmol of this compound into each lateral ventricle of Sprague-Dawley rats resulted in small, and transient decreases in noradrenaline (NA) and serotonin (5-HT) levels in the hippocampus, while inducing a permanent and significant cholinergic hypofunction in the same brain region. The experiments described in this paper were designed to test the hypothesis that such noradrenergic and serotonergic changes after small doses of AF64A are secondary to the changes observed in cholinergic neurons. Levels of NA, and of 5-HT and its metabolite 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid (5-HIAA) were measured concurrently with levels of acetylcholine (ACh), in various brain regions of rats in which the effect of AF64A was attenuated, and in respective control animals. The effect of AF64A was diminished by inhibiting the interaction of AF64A with the high affinity transport site for choline (HAChT). This was achieved using hemicholinium-3 (HC-3), which does not cross the blood-brain barrier, and A-4 (a bis 4-methylpiperidine analog of HC-3), which is centrally active following its peripheral administration. A-4 (20 or 40 mg/kg i.p.) or HC-3 (10 micrograms/ventricle) had no effect on ACh, NA, 5-HT or 5-HIAA levels in saline-treated rats. However, all treatments significantly attenuated the decrease in ACh content produced by AF64A pretreatment. Transient decreases in NA, 5-HT and 5-HIAA contents after AF64A treatment were prevented or reduced by prior treatment with A-4 or HC-3. These results indicate that changes in noradrenergic and serotonergic neurons following AF64A administration are not due to non-specific toxicity of AF64A, but may be the result of adaptation of these neurons to withdrawal of cholinergic input, which would normally inhibit the release of NA and 5-HT. These results also indicate that AF64A can be used to produce specific lesions of hippocampal cholinergic nerve terminals.