OBJECTIVE: To identify global research trends in the use of stem cell transplantation to treat epilepsy. DATA RETRIEVAL: We performed a bibliometric analysis of studies on the use of stem cell transplantation to treat epilepsy during 2002-2011, retrieved from Web of Science, using the key words epilepsy or epileptic or epilepticus or seizure and "stem cell". SELECTION CRITERIA: INCLUSION CRITERIA: (a) peer-reviewed published articles on the use of stem cell transplantation to treat epilepsy indexed in Web of Science; (b) original research articles, reviews, meeting abstracts, proceedings papers, book chapters, editorial material, and news items. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: (a) Annual publication output; (b) type of publication; (c) publication by research field; (d) publication by journal; (e) publication by author; (f) publication by country and institution; (g) publications by institution in China; (h) most-cited papers; and (i) papers published by Chinese authors or institutions. RESULTS: A total of 460 publications on the use of stem cell transplantation to treat epilepsy were retrieved from Web of Science, 2002-2011. The number of publications gradually increased over the 10-year study period. Articles and reviews constituted the major types of publications. More than half of the studies were in the field of neuroscience/neurology. The most prolific journals for this topic were Epilepsia, Bone Marrow Transplantation, and Journal of Neuroscience. Of the 460 publications, almost half came from American authors and institutions; relatively few papers were published by Chinese authors or institutions. CONCLUSION: Literature on stem cell transplantation for epilepsy includes many reports of basic research, but few of clinical trials or treatments. Exact effects are not yet evaluated. Epilepsy rehabilitation is a long-term, complex, and comprehensive system engineering. With advances in medical development, some effective medical, social and educational measures are needed to facilitate patient's treatment and training and accelerate the recovery of life ability, learning ability and social adaptability to the largest extent to improve patient's quality of life.