INTRODUCTION: Clinically, a good deal of injury from stroke results from ischemic-reperfusion. There is a loss of cerebral parenchyma and its associated cells, disruption of neuronal connections, compromise of the blood-brain barrier, and inflammation. We tested whether exogenously engrafted human neural stem cells could migrate rapidly and extensively to damaged regions, following transplantation into a neurogenic site where migration cues are already underway during stroke onset, then counteract a number of these pathological processes. METHODS: One day post-injury, we injected human neural stem cells (hNSCs) into the ipsilesional hippocampus of a mouse model of stroke with middle cerebral artery occlusion to induce focal ischemia followed by reperfusion (MCAO/R). The time frame for hNSC transplantation corresponded to upregulation of endogenous proinflammatory cytokines. We examined the effect of hNSC transplantation on pathological processes and behavioral dysfunction 48 hours post-injury. RESULTS: Twenty-four hours after transplantation, engrafted hNSCs had migrated extensively to the lesion, and infarct volume was reduced relative to MCAO/R controls. The behavioral deficits seen in MCAO/R controls were also significantly improved. Given this rapid response, we hypothesized that the mechanisms underlying therapeutic activity were anti-inflammatory rather than due to cell replacement. In support of this idea, in hNSC-transplanted mice we observed reduced microglial activation, decreased expression of proinflammatory factors (tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1beta, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha) and adhesion molecules (intercellular adhesion molecule-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1), and amelioration of blood-brain barrier damage. CONCLUSIONS: While long-term effects of engrafted hNSCs on the amelioration of ischemic stroke-induced behavioral dysfunction in a rodent model have been reported, our study is the first to show rapid, beneficial impacts on behavioral function (within 24 hours) upon early delivery of hNSCs into the hippocampus.