Cognitive dysfunction is a major sign of cerebral malaria (CM). However, the underlying mechanisms of CM cognitive outcome remain poorly understood. A body of evidence suggests that adult neurogenesis may play a role in learning and memory processes. It has also been reported that these phenomena can be regulated by the immune system. We hypothesized that memory dysfunction in CM results from hippocampal neurogenesis impairment mediated by the deregulated immune response during the acute phase of CM. C57Bl/6 mice were infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) strain, using a standardized inoculation of 10(6) parasitized erythrocytes. Long-term working memory was evaluated using the novel object recognition test. The mRNA expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), tropomyosin-receptor-kinase (TRK-B) and nerve growth factor (NGF) in the frontal cortex and hippocampus was estimated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The protein levels of cytokine interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and CCL11 and neurotrophins BDNF and NGF were determined using a cytometric bead array (CBA) kit or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Cell viability in the hippocampus was analyzed by Confocal Microscopy. Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus was determined through quantification of doublecortin (DCX) positive cells. PbA-infected mice presented working memory impairment on day 5 post-infection. At this same time point, CM mice exhibited a decrease in DCX-positive cells in the dentate gyrus in parallel with increased cell death and elevated inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma and CCL11) in the hippocampus and frontal cortex. A significant reduction of BDNF mRNA expression was also found. IL-6 and TNF-alpha correlated negatively with BDNF and NGF levels in the hippocampus of CM mice. In summary, we provide further evidence that neuroinflammation following PbA-infection influences neurotrophin expression, impairs adult hippocampal neurogenesis and increases hippocampal cell death in association with memory impairment following CM course. The current study identified potential mediators of memory impairment in CM.