BACKGROUND: One of the more profound features of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is that females have a 9:1 prevalence of this disease over males. Up to 80% of SLE patients have cognitive defects or affective disorders. The mechanism of CNS injury responsible for cognitive impairment is unknown. We previously showed that ERalpha deficiency significantly reduced renal disease and increased survival in lupus-prone mice. We hypothesized that ERalpha deficiency would be similarly protective in the brain, and that ERalpha may play a role in modulating blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity and/or neuroinflammation in lupus-prone mice. METHODS: MRL/lpr ERalpha+/+ and ERalphaKO mice (n = 46) were ovariectomized, received 17beta-estradiol pellets, and underwent radial arm water maze (WRAM) and novel object recognition (NOR) testing starting at eight weeks of age. Mice were sacrificed and brains were hemisected and processed for either immunohistochemistry, or hippocampus and parietal cortex dissection for Western blotting. RESULTS: MRL/lpr ERalphaKO mice (n = 21) performed significantly better in WRAM testing than wild-type MRL/lpr mice (n = 25). There was a significant reduction in reference memory errors (P <0.007), working memory errors (P <0.05), and start arm errors (P <0.02) in ERalphaKO mice. There were significant differences in NOR testing, particularly total exploration time, with ERalpha deficiency normalizing behavior. No significant differences were seen in markers of tight junction, astrogliosis, or microgliosis in the hippocampus or cortex by Western blot, however, there was a significant reduction in numbers of Iba1+ activated microglia in the hippocampus of ERalphaKO mice, as evidenced by immunohistochemietry (IHC). CONCLUSION: ERalpha deficiency provides significant protection against cognitive deficits in MRL/lpr mice as early as eight weeks of age. Additionally, the significant reduction in Iba1+ activated microglia in the MRL/lpr ERalphaKO mice was consistent with reduced inflammation, and may represent a biological mechanism for the cognitive improvement observed.