BACKGROUND: VGF (nonacryonimic) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT (also known as protein kinase B, PKB)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling play pivotal roles in depression. However, whether phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT/mTOR signaling-mediated VGF participates in rapid-acting antidepressant-like actions of GLYX-13 is unclear. METHODS: Herein, we evaluated the effects of acute treatment of GLYX-13 (0.5, 5, and 10mg/kg, i.p.) in the forced swim test. In addition, we assessed whether the acute treatment with GLYX-13 reverses the depressive-like behaviors induced by chronic unpredictable mild stress. Furthermore, we determined whether the Vgf knockdown in hippocampus of mice blocks the effects of GLYX-13. Moreover, we also demonstrated the effects of intra-hippocampus infusion of LY294002 (10 nmol/side), a specific phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor prior to the treatment of GLYX-13 in the forced swim test. Lastly, whether alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor and mTOR activation involves in the antidepressant-like effects of GLYX-13 was examined. RESULTS: Our results shown that GLYX-13 dose-dependently reversed the depressive-like behaviors in forced swim test. Additionally, GLYX-13 significantly reversed the downregulation of phosphorylation of AKT, mTOR, and eukaryotic elongation factor 2 as well as VGF induced by chronic unpredictable mild stress in hippocampus. Further, Vgf knockdown in hippocampus of mice significantly blocked the rapid-acting antidepressant-like effects and upregulation on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT/mTOR/VGF signaling of GLYX-13. Moreover, intra-hippocampus infusion of LY294002 significantly abolished the antidepressant-like effects and upregulation on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT/mTOR/VGF signaling of GLYX-13. Finally, antidepressant-like effects of GLYX-13 required AMPA receptor and mTOR activation, as evidenced by the ability of NBQX and rapamycin to block the effects of GLYX-13, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT/mTOR signaling-mediated VGF in hippocampus may be involved in the antidepressant-like effects of GLYX-13.