KEY POINTS: In Parkinson's disease, the protein alpha-synuclein (alphaS) is produced within neurons and also appears in the extracellular fluid. In this study in hippocampal neurons, alphaS formed non-selective cation channels with multiple levels of conductance and rectification depending on their insertion site. alphaS channels induced local spontaneous increases in intracellular Na(+) and Ca(2+), depolarized neurons, augmented bursting activity and stimulated the opening of ATP-sensitive K(+) channels. Non-selective channels were also observed in neurons transfected with either wild-type or mutant A53T alphaS, and after extracellular application of these proteins. The properties of alphaS channels in neuronal membranes suggest that extracellular alphaS is more toxic than alphaS produced within neurons. In Parkinson's disease and several other neurodegenerative diseases, the protein alpha-synuclein (alphaS) is produced within neurons and accumulates in the extracellular fluid. Several mechanisms of alphaS action are proposed, one of which is the formation of cation-permeable pores that may mediate toxicity. alphaS induces non-selective cation channels in lipid bilayers, but whether this occurs in living neurons and which properties the channels possess have not yet been examined. In this study the properties of alphaS channels in dissociated hippocampal neurons are documented. In cell-attached recordings the incorporation of alphaS into membranes was driven by applied negative potentials. These channels exhibited multiple levels of conductance (30, 70 and 120 pS at -100 mV) and inward rectification. The persistent activity of alphaS channels induced local changes in intracellular Na(+) and Ca(2+), depolarized neurons and augmented bursting activity. alphaS channels formed by adding alphaS to the intracellular membrane in inside-out patches exhibited outward rectification. alphaS channels were equally permeable to Na(+), K(+) and Ca(2+). These channels were also observed in neurons transfected with wild-type or mutant A53T alphaS, and after extracellular application of wild-type or mutant A53T alphaS proteins. Opening of alphaS channels stimulated opening of ATP-sensitive K(+) (KATP ) channels and did not interfere with the activity of delayed rectifier K(+) channels. The properties of alphaS channels in neuronal membranes suggest stronger toxicity of extracellularly applied alphaS than intracellular alphaS. Enhancement of neuronal excitability and distortions in ion homeostasis may underlie the toxic effects of alphaS that can be dampened by KATP channels.