ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Several species from the genus Hippocampus have been widely used as a traditional medicine or invigorant with long history in China. Five species of them have been recorded in Chinese pharmacopoeia with name Hippocampus (Chinese name Haima [symbol: see text]). The ethnopharmacologial history of this genus indicated that they possess anti-tumor, anti-aging, anti-fatigue, anti-prostatic hyperplasia activities and can be used for the treatment of tumor, aging, fatigue, thrombus, inflammatory, hypertension and impotence. This review focuses on the traditional medicinal uses of Hippocampus species, as well as the phytochemical, pharmacological and toxicological studies on this genus. MATERIALS AND METHODS: To provide an overview of the ethnopharmacology, chemical constituents, pharmacology and clinical applications of the genus Hippocampus, and to reveal their therapeutic potentials and being an evidence base for further research works of the Hippocampus. Information on the Hippocampus species was collected from scientific journals, books, thesis and reports based on the Chinese herbal classic literature and worldwide accepted scientific databases via a library and electronic search (PubMed, Elsevier, Scopus, Google Scholar, Springer, Web of Science and CNKI). RESULTS: A survey of literature revealed that the major chemical constituents of Hippocampus are sterides, essential amino acids, fatty acids and microelements. Experimental evidences confirmed that the Hippocampus could be used in treating tumor, aging, fatigue, thrombus, inflammatory, hypertension, prostatic hyperplasia and impotence. The most important function of Hippocampus in TCM is invigorating kidney-yang. The key traditional uses of Hippocampus have been investigated in vitro and in vivo, but their mechanism and clinical trial data are needed, and the sustainable exploitation of the endangered Hippocampus species should be considered. This literature analysis of traditional medicinal uses and experimental chemical and pharmacological data of Hippocampus provide a scientific basis for future research. CONCLUSIONS: Hippocampus is a promising traditional medicine and holds great potential for being exploited as healthy products and drugs. Aquaculture and substitutes of Hippocampus are valid approaches to protect Hippocampus form being endangered species.