Increasing evidence supports the critical role of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) glutamate receptors in psychostimulant action. These receptors are regulated via a phosphorylation-dependent mechanism in their trafficking, distribution, and function. The hippocampus is a brain structure important for learning and memory and is emerging as a critical site for processing psychostimulant effects. To determine whether the hippocampal pool of AMPA receptors is regulated by stimulants, we investigated and characterized the impact of amphetamine (AMPH) on phosphorylation of AMPA receptors in the adult rat hippocampus in vivo. We found that AMPH markedly increased phosphorylation of AMPA receptor GluA1 subunits at serine 845 (S845) in the hippocampus. The effect of AMPH was dose dependent. A single dose of AMPH induced a rapid and transient increase in S845 phosphorylation. Among different hippocampal subfields, AMPH primarily elevated S845 phosphorylation in the Cornu Ammonis area 1 and dentate gyrus. In contrast to S845, serine 831 phosphorylation of GluA1 and serine 880 phosphorylation of GluA2 were not altered by AMPH. In addition, surface expression of hippocampal GluA1 was up-regulated, while the amount of intracellular GluA1 fraction was concurrently reduced in response to AMPH. GluA2 protein levels in either the surface or intracellular pool were insensitive to AMPH. These data demonstrate that the AMPA receptor in the hippocampus is sensitive to dopamine stimulation. Acute AMPH administration induces dose-, time-, site-, and subunit-dependent phosphorylation of AMPA receptors and facilitates surface trafficking of GluA1 AMPA receptors in hippocampal neurons in vivo. Acute injection of amphetamine increased phosphorylation of alpha-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor GluA1 subunits at a protein kinase A (PKA)-sensitive site (S845) in the rat hippocampus. This increase was dose- and time-dependent and correlated with an increase in surface GluA1 expression. Thus, amphetamine can upregulate GluA1 phosphorylation and surface trafficking of GluA1 in hippocampal neurons in vivo.