OBJECTIVE: To determine if levetiracetam (LEV) enhances the impact in excitatory presynaptic terminals of a rate-limiting mechanism in vesicle trafficking termed supply rate depression that emerges to limit synaptic transmission during heavy, epileptiform use. METHODS: The effect of LEV was measured with electrophysiologic assays of monosynaptic connections in ex vivo hippocampal slices from wild-type and synapsin knockout mice, and in primary cell culture neurons from wild-type and synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2a (SV2a) knockout mice. RESULTS: LEV enhanced the impact of supply rate depression at Schaffer collateral synapses by shortening the time course for induction. The LEV effect was selective for supply rate depression because other presynaptic vesicle trafficking mechanisms were not affected. The half maximal effective concentration (EC50 ) was ~50 mum. The maximal effect was ~15% and occurred at 100 mum, which is a clinically relevant concentration. An experimental protocol is established for distinguishing atypical antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) that affect supply rate depression, such as LEV, from typical AEDs, such as carbamazepine, that affect upstream mechanisms. The LEV effect was abolished at synapses from knockout mice lacking SV2a and from synapses lacking synapsin 1 and 2. SIGNIFICANCE: The findings are consistent with the new hypothesis that LEV acts to treat epilepsy by accelerating the induction of supply rate depression at excitatory synapses during incipient epileptic activity. The absence of the effect in the knockouts confirms that presynaptic function is the target. More specifically, the absence in SV2a knockouts is consistent with previous binding studies suggesting that SV2a is the target for LEV. The absence in synapsin knockouts indicates that the phenotypic target intersects with the biochemical pathway that is altered in synapsin knockouts. The results from synapsin knockouts additionally suggest that development of functional analogs with increased potency might be possible because induction of supply rate depression is faster in synapsin knockouts compared to wild-type synapses treated with LEV.