BACKGROUND: Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) result from fetal exposure to alcohol and are the leading cause of mental retardation in the United States. There is currently no effective treatment that targets the causes of these disorders. Thus, novel therapies are critically needed to limit the neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative pathologies associated with FASD. METHODS: A neonatal mouse FASD model was used to examine the role of the neuroimmune system in ethanol (EtOH)-induced neuropathology. Neonatal C57BL/6 mice were treated with EtOH, with or without pioglitazone, on postnatal days 4 through 9, and tissue was harvested 1 day post treatment. Pioglitazone is a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma agonist that exhibits anti-inflammatory activity and is neuroprotective. We compared the effects of EtOH with or without pioglitazone on cytokine and chemokine expression and microglial morphology in the hippocampus, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex. RESULTS: In EtOH-treated animals compared with controls, cytokines interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha mRNA levels were increased significantly in the hippocampus, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex. Chemokine CCL2 mRNA was increased significantly in the hippocampus and cerebellum. Pioglitazone effectively blocked the EtOH-induced increase in the cytokines and chemokine in all tissues to the level expressed in handled-only and vehicle-treated control animals. EtOH also produced a change in microglial morphology in all brain regions that was indicative of microglial activation, and pioglitazone blocked this EtOH-induced morphological change. CONCLUSIONS: These studies indicate that EtOH activates microglia to a pro-inflammatory stage and also increases the expression of neuroinflammatory cytokines and chemokines in diverse regions of the developing brain. Further, the anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective PPAR-gamma agonist pioglitazone blocked these effects. It is proposed that microglial activation and inflammatory molecules expressed as a result of EtOH treatment during brain development contribute to the sequelae associated with FASD. Thus, pioglitazone and anti-inflammatory pharmaceuticals more broadly have potential as novel therapeutics for FASD.