Colchicine induces neurodegeneration, but the extent of neurodegeneration in different areas of the brain in relation to neuroinflammation remains unclear. Such information may be useful to allow for the development of a model to compare colchicine-induced neurodegeneration with other neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's Disease (AD). The present study was designed to investigate the extent of neurodegeneration along with neuroinflammation in different areas of the brain, e.g. frontal cortex, parietal cortex, occipital cortex, corpus striatum, amygdala and hippocampus, in rats along with memory impairment 21 days after a single intracerebroventricular (icv) injection of colchicine. Memory parameters were measured before and after icv colchicine injection in all test groups of rats (control, sham-operated, colchicine-injected [ICIR] rats). On Day 21 post-injection, rats from all groups were anesthesized and tissues from the various brain areas were collected for assessment of biomarkers of neuroinflammation (i.e. levels of ROS, nitrite and proinflammatory cytokines TNFalpha and IL-1beta) and neurodegeneration (assessed histologically). The single injection of colchicine resulted in impaired memory and neurodegeneration (significant presence of plaques, Nissl granule chromatolysis) in various brain areas (frontal cortex, amygdala, parietal cortex, corpus striatum), with maximum severity in the hippocampus. While IL-1beta, TNFalpha, ROS and nitrite levels were altered in different brain areas in the ICIR rats, these parameters had their greatest change in the hippocampus. This study showed that icv injection of colchicine caused strong neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in the hippocampus of rats and the increases in neurodegeneration were corroborated with those of neuroinflammation at the site. The present study also showed that the extent of neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in different brain areas of the colchicine-injected rats were AD-like and supported the fact that such rats might have the ability to serve as a sporadic model of AD.