OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of scalp-acupuncture intervention on the expression of Bcl-2 of astrocytes in the hippocampus in vascular dementia (VD) rats, so as to reveal its underlying mechanism in improving VD. METHODS: A total of 40 male SD rats were randomly divided into normal control, sham-operation, VD model, and scalp-acupuncture groups (n=10 in each group). The VD model was established by using modified Pulsinelli 4-vessel-occlusion method. Scalp-acupuncture was applied to bilateral "Daozang Shangjiao" and bilateral "Jiyi", and "Siwei" acupoints according to FANG's scalp-acupuncture therapy for 30 min, once daily for 10 days. The rat's learning-memory ability was detected by Morris water maze tests, and the expression of apoptosis related proteins Bcl-2 of astrocytes in the hippocampus was detected by immunofluorescence double labeling technique and Western blot, respectively. RESULTS: Morris water maze tests showed that the average escape latency of place navigation test and the duration of the first platform-site crossover (space probing test) were significantly increased in the model group compared with the normal control group (P<0.01), and the number of platform-site crossovers in 2 min was markedly decreased in the model group (P<0.01). The increased average escape latency and the increased duration of first platform-site crossover were markedly shortened in the scalp-acupuncture group in comparison with the model group (P<0.01), and the number of the platform crossovers in 2 min was significantly increased in the scalp-acupuncture group (P<0.01). The expression of Bcl-2 protein and the number of GFAP/Bcl-2-labeled cells of hippocampal CA 1 region in the model group were remarkably decreased compared with the normal control group (P<0.01). After scalp-acupuncture intervention, the decreased Bcl-2 protein expression level and the number of double-labeled GFAP/Bcl-2 cells were significantly up-regulated in the scalp-acupuncture group compared with the model group (P<0.01). No significant differences were found between the normal control and sham-operation groups in the escape latency, duration of the first platform-site crossover, number of platform crossovers in 2 min, number of GFAP/Bcl-2 double labeled cells and the expression level of hippocampal Bcl-2 protein (P>0.05). CONCLUSION: Scalp-acupuncture can effectively regulate the expression of apoptosis related proteins Bcl-2 of astrocytes in the CA 1 region of hippocampus in rats with VD, which may contribute to its effect in the improvement of VD.