Environmental enrichment (EE), which mimics the wealth of sensory, motor and cognitive stimuli that arise through intense interactions with the ambient environment, results in enhanced hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP) and spatial learning. A key molecular factor in the mediation of these changes is the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). One of the downstream cascades that is activated by BDNF is the cascade linked to the small GTPase, Ras, that triggers mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activity and is part of the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) pathway that can lead to synaptic restructuring to support LTP. Here, we explored whether persistent activation of Ras in neurons further enhances LTP following EE of rodents. Immediately following weaning, transgenic mice that expressed constitutively activated neuronal Ras, or their wildtype (Wt) littermates, underwent 3weeks of constant EE. In the absence of EE, theta burst stimulation (TBS) evoked LTP in the CA1 region of transgenic mice that was not significantly different from LTP in Wts. After 3weeks of EE, hippocampal LTP was improved in Wt mice. Enriched transgenic mice showed an equivalent level of LTP to enriched Wts, but it was not significantly different from non-enriched synRas controls. Western blot analysis performed after a pull-down assay showed that non-enriched transgenic mice expressed higher Ras activity compared to non-enriched Wts. Following EE, Ras activity was reduced in transgenics to levels detected in Wts. These results show that constitutive activation of Ras does not mimic the effects of EE on LTP. In addition, EE results in an equivalent enhancement of LTP transgenics and Wts, coupled with a decrease in Ras activity to Wt levels. This suggests that permanent activation of Ras in neurons of synRas animals following EE results in an altered feedback regulation of endogenous Ras activity that is not a key factor in LTP enhancements. The maintenance of Ras within a physiological range may thus be required for the optimization of LTP in the hippocampus.