In some regions of the hippocampus, neurogenesis persists throughout life and is upregulated following hypoxia/ischemia. The mechanisms underlying the upregulation of neurogenesis, however, are not known. Here we examined the expression of two factors thought to be involved in hypoxia-related neurogenesis, hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and brain-derived erythropoietin (EPO), in the hippocampus of neonatal rats following hypoxia-ischemia. Sprague-Dawley rat pups were exposed to hypoxia-ischemia conditions or hypoxia conditions only. For the hypoxia-ischemia experiment, the left common carotid artery of Sprague-Dawley rat pups was ligated on postnatal day 7. The pups were exposed to hypoxic conditions and then returned to normoxia for re-oxygenation. Immunohistochemical staining was performed to evaluate EPO and HIF-1alpha expression at various time points after re-oxygenation (1 h, 6 h, 16 h, 1 d, 3 d, and 7 d). EPO expression in the hippocampus was verified using Western blot studies. For the hypoxia-only experiment, postnatal day 7 rat pups were continuously exposed to hypoxic conditions for different durations (0.5 h, 1 h, 2 h, 3 h, and 5 h). HIF-1alpha expression in the hippocampus was evaluated by immunohistochemical staining. In the hypoxia-ischemia group, EPO expression was significantly altered. The EPO expression increased during re-oxygenation, peaked at 16 h, and decreased thereafter. In the hypoxia-only group, the EPO protein was not detectable. When the rat pups were returned to normoxia for re-oxygenation, there was no HIF-1alpha expression. HIF-1alpha immunoreactivity was present in the hypoxia-only group and peaked in rats exposed to continuous hypoxic conditions for 3 h. In addition, endogenous EPO increased in the neonatal rats after the hypoxia-ischemia event. Furthermore, HIF-1alpha was induced as a result of hypoxia. We postulate that disruption of homeostasis triggers and enhances hippocampal neurogenesis. Thus, HIF-1alpha/EPO hypoxic signal transduction may initiate hippocampal neurogenesis following hypoxia-ischemia.