The axon initial segment (AIS) plays a central role in electrogenesis and in the maintenance of neuronal polarity. Its molecular organization is dependent on the scaffolding protein ankyrin (Ank) G and is regulated by kinases. For example, the phosphorylation of voltage-gated sodium channels by the protein kinase CK2 regulates their interaction with AnkG and, consequently, their accumulation at the AIS. We previously showed that IQ motif containing J-Schwannomin-Interacting Protein 1 (IQCJ-SCHIP-1), an isoform of the SCHIP-1, accumulated at the AIS in vivo. Here, we analyzed the molecular mechanisms involved in IQCJ-SCHIP-1-specific axonal location. We showed that IQCJ-SCHIP-1 accumulation in the AIS of cultured hippocampal neurons depended on AnkG expression. Pull-down assays and surface plasmon resonance analysis demonstrated that AnkG binds to CK2-phosphorylated IQCJ-SCHIP-1 but not to the non-phosphorylated protein. Surface plasmon resonance approaches using IQCJ-SCHIP-1, SCHIP-1a, another SCHIP-1 isoform, and their C-terminus tail mutants revealed that a segment including multiple CK2-phosphorylatable sites was directly involved in the interaction with AnkG. Pharmacological inhibition of CK2 diminished both IQCJ-SCHIP-1 and AnkG accumulation in the AIS. Silencing SCHIP-1 expression reduced AnkG cluster at the AIS. Finally, over-expression of IQCJ-SCHIP-1 decreased AnkG concentration at the AIS, whereas a mutant deleted of the CK2-regulated AnkG interaction site did not. Our study reveals that CK2-regulated IQJC-SCHIP-1 association with AnkG contributes to AIS maintenance. The axon initial segment (AIS) organization depends on ankyrin (Ank) G and kinases. Here we showed that AnkG binds to CK2-phosphorylated IQCJ-SCHIP-1, in a segment including 12 CK2-phosphorylatable sites. In cultured neurons, either pharmacological inhibition of CK2 or IQCJ-SCHIP-1 silencing reduced AnkG clustering. Overexpressed IQCJ-SCHIP-1 decreased AnkG concentration at the AIS whereas a mutant deleted of the CK2-regulated AnkG interaction site did not. Thus, CK2-regulated IQJC-SCHIP-1 association with AnkG contributes to AIS maintenance.