PURPOSE: We investigated the effects of 8 weeks of treadmill exercise on nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and synapsin I protein expression and on the number of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine-5'-mono-phosphate (BrdU)-positive cells in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus in socially isolated rats. Additionally, we examined the effects of exercise on the number of serotonin (5-HT)- and tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH)-positive cells in the raphe nuclei and on depression behaviors induced by social isolation. METHODS: Forty male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into four groups: (1) group housing and control group (GCG, n = 10); (2) group housing and exercise group (GEG, n = 10); (3) isolated housing and control group (ICG, n = 10); and (4) isolated housing and exercise group (IEG, n = 10). After 1 week of housing under the normal condition of 3 animals per cage, rats were socially isolated via transfer to individual cages for 8 weeks. Rats were then subjected to treadmill exercise for 5 days per week for 8 weeks during which time the speed of the treadmill was gradually increased. RESULTS: Compared to the GCG, levels of NGF, BDNF, and synapsin I were significantly decreased in the ICG and significantly increased in the IEG (p < 0.001 respectively). Significantly more BrdU-positive cells in the GEG were present as compared to the GCG and ICG, and more BrdU-positive cells were found in the IEG as compared to the ICG (p < 0.001). 5-HT-positive cells in the GEG were significantly increased compared to the GCG and ICG, and more of these cells were found in the IEG as compared to the ICG (p < 0.01). TPH-positive cells in the GEG were significantly increased compared to those in the GCG and ICG (p < 0.05). In the forced swim test, immobility time was significantly increased in the ICG and significantly decreased in the IEG as compared to the ICG (p < 0.01). CONCLUSION: These results showed that regular treadmill exercise following social isolation not only increased the levels of NGF, BDNF, and synapsin I to induce survival of neurons in the hippocampus but also improved depression by increasing the number of serotonergic cells in the raphe nuclei.