Lewy bodies, mainly composed of alpha-synuclein (alphaS), are pathological hallmarks of Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Epidemiological studies showed that green tea consumption or habitual intake of phenolic compounds reduced Parkinson's disease risk. We previously reported that phenolic compounds inhibited alphaS fibrillation and destabilized preformed alphaS fibrils. Cumulative evidence suggests that low-order alphaS oligomers are neurotoxic and critical species in the pathogenesis of alpha-synucleinopathies. To develop disease modifying therapies for alpha-synucleinopathies, we examined effects of phenolic compounds (myricetin (Myr), curcumin, rosmarinic acid (RA), nordihydroguaiaretic acid, and ferulic acid) on alphaS oligomerization. Using methods such as photo-induced cross-linking of unmodified proteins, circular dichroism spectroscopy, the electron microscope, and the atomic force microscope, we showed that Myr and RA inhibited alphaS oligomerization and secondary structure conversion. The nuclear magnetic resonance analysis revealed that Myr directly bound to the N-terminal region of alphaS, whereas direct binding of RA to monomeric alphaS was not detected. Electrophysiological assays for long-term potentiation in mouse hippocampal slices revealed that Myr and RA ameliorated alphaS synaptic toxicity by inhibition of alphaS oligomerization. These results suggest that Myr and RA prevent the alphaS aggregation process, reducing the neurotoxicity of alphaS oligomers. To develop disease modifying therapies for alpha-synucleinopathies, we examined effects of phenolic compounds on alpha-synuclein (alphaS) oligomerization. Phenolic compounds, especially Myricetin (Myr) and Rosmarinic acid (RA), inhibited alphaS oligomerization and secondary structure conversion. Myr and RA ameliorated alphaS synaptic toxicity on the experiment of long-term potentiation. Our results suggest that Myr and RA prevent alphaS aggregation process and reduce the neurotoxicity of alphaS oligomers. Phenolic compounds are good candidates of disease modifying drugs for alpha-synucleinopathies.