OBJECTIVE: To explore the analgesic effect and action mechanism of electroacupuncture (EA) on gastric ulcer rats with liver-depression syndrome. METHODS: Through open-field experimental method, 45 qualified SPF-grade male SD rats were selected and divided into a blank group, a model group and an EA group according to random number table method, 15 rats in each group. The model of gastric ulcer rats with liver-depression syndrome was established in the model group and the EA group by using chronic unpredictable stimulation combined with acetic acid burning method. Rats in the blank group did not receive intervention. Rats in the model group were treated with fixation and immobilization for 13 days. Rats in the EA group were treated with EA at "Liangqiu" (ST 34) and "Ganshu" (BL 18); EA voltage was 2 V; disperse-dense wave was selected with 4 Hz of disperse wave and 15 Hz of dense wave, and the intensity of EA was according to the slight vibration of local skin and; muscles; the needles were retained for 20 min, once a day for consecutive 6 days; there was an interval of 1 day' and the treatment was given for 2 weeks. The general condition, open-field experimental result and gastric ulcer index were observed; the western blotting method was applied to measure the expression of vanilloid receptor subtype 1 (VR1) in hypothalamus and gastric antral mucosal, and ELISA method was applied to test the expression of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) and norepinephrine (NE) in hippocampus. RESULTS: After model establishment, the general behavior condition in the model group was inferior to that in the blank group, which was obviously improved after EA. The range of motion in the model group was less than that in the blank group (P<0.01) while that in the EA group was higher than that in the model group (P<0.01). The ulcer inhibition rate was. 54.95%, and the ulcer index in the EA group was lower than that in the model group (P<0.01). Compared with; the blank group, the expression of VR1 in hypothalamus and gastric antral mucosal in the model group was increased (P<0.05); compared with the model group, the expression of VR1 in the EA group was reduced (P<0.05). Compared with the blank group, the expression of 5-HT an NE in hippocampus in the model group was significantly reduced (both P<0.01); compared with the model group, the expression of 5-HT and NE in the EA group was increased (both P<0.01). CONCLUSION: EA at "Liangqiu" (ST 34) and "Ganshu" (BL 18) has certain analgesic effect in gastric ulcer rats with liver-depression syndrome, which is likely to be related with lowering the contents of VR1 in hypothalamus and gastric antral mucosal and increasing the content of 5-HT and NE in hippocampus.