BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated that the trafficking defects of Nav1.1/Nav1.2 are involved in the dementia pathophysiology. However, the detailed mechanisms are not fully understood. Moreover, whether the impaired miRNAs regulation linked to dementia is a key player in sodium channel trafficking disturbance remains unclear. The cognitive impairment induced by chronic cerebral ischemia through chronic brain hypoperfusion (CBH) is likely reason to precede dementia. Therefore, our goal in the present study was to examine the role of microRNA-9 (miR-9) in regulating Nav1.1/Nav1.2 trafficking under CBH generated by bilateral common carotid artery occlusion (2VO). RESULTS: The impairment of Nav1.1/Nav1.2 trafficking and decreased expression of Navbeta2 were found in the hippocampi and cortices of rats following CBH generated by bilateral 2VO. MiR-9 was increased in both the hippocampi and cortices of rats following CBH by qRT-PCR. Intriguingly, miR-9 suppressed, while AMO-miR-9 enhanced, the trafficking of Nav1.1/Nav1.2 from cytoplasm to cell membrane. Further study showed that overexpression of miR-9 inhibited the Navbeta2 expression by targeting on its coding sequence (CDS) domain by dual luciferase assay. However, binding-site mutation or miR-masks failed to influence Navbeta2 expression as well as Nav1.1/Nav1.2 trafficking process, indicating that Navbeta2 is a potential target for miR-9. Lentivirus-mediated miR-9 overexpression also inhibited Navbeta2 expression and elicited translocation deficits to cell membrane of Nav1.1/Nav1.2 in rats, whereas injection of lentivirus-mediated miR-9 knockdown could reverse the impaired trafficking of Nav1.1/Nav1.2 triggered by 2VO. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that miR-9 may play a key role in regulating the process of Nav1.1/Nav1.2 trafficking via targeting on Navbeta2 protein in 2VO rats at post-transcriptional level, and inhibition of miR-9 may be a potentially valuable approach to prevent Nav1.1/Nav1.2 trafficking disturbance induced by CBH.