Naringenin is a flavonoid polyphenolic compound, which facilitates the removal of free radicals, oxidative stress and inflammation. The present study aimed to obtain a better understanding of the effects of curcumin on the regulation of diabetesassociated cognitive decline, and its underlying mechanisms. An experimental diabetes mellitus (DM) rat model was induced by streptozoticin (50 mg/kg). Following treatment with naringin (100 and 200 mg/kg) for 16 weeks, the body weight and blood glucose levels of the DM rats were measured. A morris water maze test was used to analyze the effects of naringin on the cognitive deficit of the DM rats. The levels of oxidative stress, proinflammatory factors, caspase3 and caspase9, and the protein expression of peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) were quantified in the DM rats using a commerciallyavailable kit and western blot assay, respectively. In addition, a GW9662 PPARgamma inhibitor (0.3 mg/kg) was administered to the DM rats to determine whether PPARgamma affected the effects of naringin on the cognitive deficit of the DM rats. The results demonstrated that naringin increased the body weight, blood glucose levels, and cognitive deficits of the DM rats. The levels of oxidative stress and proinflammatory factors in the naringintreated rats were significantly lower, compared with those of the DM rats. In addition, naringin activated the protein expression of PPARgamma, and administration of the PPARgamma inhibitor decreased the protein expression of PPARgamma, and attenuated the effects of naringin on cognitive deficit. The results also demonstrated that naringin decreased the expression levels of caspase3 and caspase9 in the DM rats. These results suggested that naringin ameliorated cognitive deficits via oxidative stress, proinflammatory factors and the PPARgamma signaling pathway in the type 2 diabetic rat model. Furthermore, oxidative stress, proinflammatory factors and PPARgamma signaling may be involved in mediating these effects.