OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to determine the effect of pluripotent astrocytic stem cells (PASCs) and fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) on cognitive function in neonatal rats with hypoxic-ischemic brain injury (HIBI). METHODS: The study was performed on 7-d-old rats that were randomly divided into four groups. All rats, except those in the sham group, were kept in a hypoxic chamber containing 8% oxygen for 2 h after the ligation of the right carotid artery. Next, 5 d after HIBI was induced, PASCs were administered to the motor cortex, and FGF-2 was administered intraperitoneally to group AF; PASCs were administered to the motor cortex, and salt solution buffered with phosphate was administered intraperitoneally to group A; and fresh cell culture solution (medium) was administered to group M. Immunofluorescence was used to localize the administered PASCs in the brains of rats from groups A and AF. The Morris water maze tank (MWM) test was performed to assess the rats' cognitive functions at week 12. The rats that were administered PASCs were observed for the development of neoplasms and autopsies were performed after 30 months. RESULTS: PASCs migrated to damaged brain regions surrounding the hippocampus in groups A and AF. The mean platform finding time (PFT) significantly decreased over time in each group on day 1-4 of MWM testing (p < 0.001). On day 2-4, the mean PFT was shortest in group S followed by group AF. In group A, the PFT was significantly longer than in group S on day 3-4 (p = 0.01 and 0.007, respectively). On day 5 of the MWM test, the time spent in the eastern quadrant (which previously contained the platform) was longest in group S followed by groups AF, A, and M; however, the differences between groups were not significant (p = 0.51). After 30 months, none of the rats in groups A or AF had benign or malignant neoplasms. CONCLUSIONS: Following the administration of PASCs in rats with experimentally induced HIBI, PASCs migrated to the injured brain regions; however, treatment with PASCs did not have a positive effect on cognitive function. The administration of FGF-2 together with PASCs resulted in positive cognitive results, although not at the level of significance.