UNLABELLED: SORLA is a neuronal sorting receptor implicated both in sporadic and familial forms of AD. SORLA reduces the amyloidogenic burden by two mechanisms, either by rerouting internalized APP molecules from endosomes to the trans-Golgi network (TGN) to prevent proteolytic processing or by directing newly produced Abeta to lysosomes for catabolism. Studies in cell lines suggested that the interaction of SORLA with cytosolic adaptors retromer and GGA is required for receptor sorting to and from the TGN. However, the relevance of anterograde or retrograde trafficking for SORLA activity in vivo remained largely unexplored. Here, we generated mouse models expressing SORLA variants lacking binding sites for GGA or retromer to query this concept in the brain. Disruption of retromer binding resulted in a retrograde-sorting defect with accumulation of SORLA in endosomes and depletion from the TGN, and in an overall enhanced APP processing. In contrast, disruption of the GGA interaction did not impact APP processing but caused increased brain Abeta levels, a mechanism attributed to a defect in anterograde lysosomal targeting of Abeta. Our findings substantiated the significance of adaptor-mediated sorting for SORLA activities in vivo, and they uncovered that anterograde and retrograde sorting paths may serve discrete receptor functions in amyloidogenic processes. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: SORLA is a sorting receptor that directs target proteins to distinct intracellular compartments in neurons. SORLA has been identified as a genetic risk factor for sporadic, but recently also for familial forms of AD. To confirm the relevance of SORLA sorting for AD processes in the brain, we generated mouse lines, which express trafficking mutants instead of the wild-type form of this receptor. Studying neuronal activities in these mutant mice, we dissected distinct trafficking routes for SORLA guided by two cytosolic adaptors termed GGA and retromer. We show that these sorting pathways serve discrete functions in control of amyloidogenic processes and may represent unique therapeutic targets to interfere with specific aspects of neurodegenerative processes in the diseased brain.