The aim of the present study was to explore the roles and possible molecular mechanism of the alleviating effect of sevoflurane pretreatment on the extracorporeal circulation and to investigate the possible involvement of the Tolllike receptor (TLR3) signaling pathway. A total of 64 male Sprague Dawley rats were randomly divided into three groups: The sham operation group (H group; n=8), cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) group (C group; n=24) and sevoflurane preconditioning group (S group; n=32). The C group was subjected to tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation, vessel puncture and catheter placement in the right femoral artery and right internal jugular vein, while no CPB was performed in the H group. The S group was pretreated with 2.4% sevoflurane for 1 h prior to establishing the CPB model. The CPB in the C and S groups was performed for 1 h. Blood of the rats was analyzed and clinical parameters were detected prior to, during and at various timepoints after CPB. In addition, eight rats from the C and S groups each were sacrificed at these timepoints and brain tissue samples were analyzed. The levels of the brain damagespecific protein S100beta as well as IL6 and IFNbeta in the serum were detected by ELISA; furthermore, the expression levels of TLR3 and TIRdomaincontaining adapterinducing interferonbeta (TRIF) in the left hippocampus were assessed by ELISA and/or western blot analysis. The right hippocampus was assessed for neuronal apoptosis by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling assay. The mean arterial pressure, heart rate and hematocrit were significantly decreased following CPB (P<0.05), while there was no significant changes in any other clinical parameters. The serum levels of S100beta and IL6 in the C group were significantly increased compared with those in the H group (P<0.05), which was attenuated by sevofluranepretreatment. Compared with the H group, the serum levels of IFNbeta as well as hippocampal protein levels of TLR3 and TRIF were significantly increased in the C group during and after CPB (P<0.05), which was markedly aggravated in the S group (P<0.05). The number of apoptotic hippocampal neurons, although being generally low, was significantly increased in the C group compared with that in the H group (P<0.05), while apoptosis was significantly attenuated by sevofluranepretreatment (P<0.05). The present study therefore concluded that 2.4% sevoflurane pretreatment has a protective effect on the rat brain against CPBinduced injury, which may be mediated via the TLR3 signaling pathway through upregulating the expression levels of antiinflammatory and downregulating proinflammatory proteins.