Previous studies have demonstrated that dysregulation of micro (mi)RNAs is associated with the etiology of various neuropsychiatric disorders, including depression and schizophrenia. Cerebralcare Granule(R) (CG) is a Chinese herbal medicine, which has been reported to have an ameliorative effect on brain injury by attenuating bloodbrain barrier disruption and improving hippocampal neural function. The present study aimed to evaluate the cognitive behavior of rats continuously overexpressing miRNA30e (lentimiRNA30e), prior to and following the administration of CG. In addition, the mechanisms underlying the ameliorative effects of CG were investigated. The cognitive ability of the rats was assessed using an openfield test and a Morris water maze spatial reference/working memory test. A terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling assay was used to detect neuronal apoptosis in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. Immunohistochemical analysis and western blotting were conducted to detect the expression levels of Bcell lymphoma 2 (BCL2) and ubiquitinconjugating enzyme 9 (UBC9), in order to examine neuronal apoptosis. The lentimiRNA30e rats exhibited increased signs of anxiety, depression, hyperactivity and schizophrenia, which resulted in a severe impairment in cognitive ability. Furthermore, in the dentate gyrus of these rats, the expression levels of BCL2 and UBC9 were reduced and apoptosis was increased. The administration of CG alleviated cognitive impairment, enhanced the expression levels of BCL2 and UBC9, and reduced apoptosis in the dentate gyrus in the lentimiRNA30e rats. No significant differences were detected in behavioral indicators between the lentimiRNA30e rats treated with CG and the normal controls. These findings suggested that CG exerts a potent therapeutic effect, conferred by its ability to enhance the expression levels of BCL2 and UBC9, which inhibits the apoptotic process in neuronal cells. Therefore, CG may be considered a potential therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cognitive impairment in mental disorders.