OBJECTIVE: Total tau (T-tau), phosphorylated tau (p-Tau) and Beta-Amyloid 1-42 (AB42) in Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) are useful biomarkers in neurodegenerative diseases. The aim of the study was to investigate the role of these and other CSF biomarkers (T-tau, p-Tau, AB42, S100B and NSE), during hypoxia-reoxygenation in a newborn pig model. DESIGN: Thirty newborn pigs were included in a study of moderate or severe hypoxia. The moderate hypoxia group (n = 12) was exposed to global hypoxia (8% O2) until Base excess (BE) reached -15 mmol/l. The pigs in the group exposed to severe hypoxia (n = 12) received 8% O2 until BE reached -20 mmol/l or mean Blood Pressure fell below 20 mm Hg, The control group (n = 6) was kept at room air. For all treatments, the CSF was collected at 9.5 hours after the intervention. RESULTS: The level of AB42 in CSF was significantly lower in the pigs exposed to severe hypoxia compared with the control group, 922(SD +/-445)pg/ml versus. 1290(SD +/-143) pg/ml (p<0.05), respectively. Further, a non-significant reduction of AB42 was observed in the group exposed to moderate hypoxia T-tau and p-Tau revealed no significant differences between the intervention groups and the control group, however a significantly higher level of S100B was seen in the CSF of pigs receiving hypoxia in comparison to the level in the control group. Further on, there was a moderate negative correlation between the levels of AB42 and S100B in CSF, as well as a moderate negative correlation between Lactate in blood at end of hypoxia and AB42 in CSF. INTERPRETATION: This is the first study to our knowledge that demonstrated a significant drop in AB42 in CSF after neonatal hypoxia. Whether or not this has an etiological basis for adult neurodegenerative disorders needs to be studied with additional experiments and epidemiological studies. AB42 and S100B are significantly changed in neonatal pigs subjected to hypoxia compared to controls and thus may be valuable biomarkers of perinatal asphyxia.