OBJECTIVE: Dopamine is an endogenous neuromodulator in cortical circuits and the basal ganglia. In animal models of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), seizure threshold is modulated to some extent by dopamine, with D1-receptors having a pro- and D2-receptors an anticonvulsant effect. We aimed to extend our previously reported results on decreased D2/D3 receptor binding in the lateral epileptogenic temporal lobe and to correlate them with demographic and seizure variables to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the underlying involvement of the dopaminergic system in the epileptogenesis of TLE. METHODS: To quantify D2/D3 receptor binding, we studied 21 patients with TLE and hippocampal sclerosis (13 left- and eight right-sided) and 18 controls using PET with the high-affinity dopamine D2/D3-receptor ligand 18F-Fallypride to image striatal and extrastriatal binding. TLE was defined by interictal and ictal video-EEG, MRI and 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose PET. Voxel-based statistical and regions-of-interest analyses were performed. RESULTS: 18F-Fallypride binding potential was significantly reduced in the affected temporal lobe and bilateral putamen. A positive correlation between age at onset of epilepsy and [18F]FP BPnd (binding potential non-displaceable) in temporal regions on the epileptogenic side was found, as well as a negative correlation between epilepsy duration and [18F]FP BPnd in the temporal pole on the epileptogenic side and a positive correlation between the estimated number of lifetime GTCS and [18F]FP BPnd in the hippocampus on the epileptogenic side. SIGNIFICANCE: The areas of reduced D2/D3 receptor availability correspond to "the irritative zone" surrounding the epileptogenic area. Moreover, reduced D2/D3 receptor availability was detectable in the basal ganglia, which are suspected to be involved in a control circuit for epileptic seizures. The correlational analysis additionally suggests that increased epilepsy duration leads to increasing impairment of the dopaminergic system.