UNLABELLED: In Alzheimer's disease, accumulation of soluble oligomers of beta-amyloid peptide is known to be highly toxic, causing disturbances in synaptic activity and neuronal death. Multiple studies relate these effects to increased oxidative stress and aberrant activity of calcium-permeable cation channels leading to calcium imbalance. The transient receptor potential melastatin 2 (TRPM2) channel, a Ca(2+)-permeable nonselective cation channel activated by oxidative stress, has been implicated in neurodegenerative diseases, and more recently in amyloid-induced toxicity. Here we show that the function of TRPM2 is augmented by treatment of cultured neurons with beta-amyloid oligomers. Aged APP/PS1 Alzheimer's mouse model showed increased levels of endoplasmic reticulum stress markers, protein disulfide isomerase and phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha, as well as decreased levels of the presynaptic marker synaptophysin. Elimination of TRPM2 in APP/PS1 mice corrected these abnormal responses without affecting plaque burden. These effects of TRPM2 seem to be selective for beta-amyloid toxicity, as ER stress responses to thapsigargin or tunicamycin in TRPM2(-/-) neurons was identical to that of wild-type neurons. Moreover, reduced microglial activation was observed in TRPM2(-/-)/APP/PS1 hippocampus compared with APP/PS1 mice. In addition, age-dependent spatial memory deficits in APP/PS1 mice were reversed in TRPM2(-/-)/APP/PS1 mice. These results reveal the importance of TRPM2 for beta-amyloid neuronal toxicity, suggesting that TRPM2 activity could be potentially targeted to improve outcomes in Alzheimer's disease. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Transient receptor potential melastatin 2 (TRPM2) is an oxidative stress sensing calcium-permeable channel that is thought to contribute to calcium dysregulation associated with neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease. Here we show that oligomeric beta-amyloid, the toxic peptide in Alzheimer's disease, facilitates TRPM2 channel activation. In mice designed to model Alzheimer's disease, genetic elimination of TRPM2 normalized deficits in synaptic markers in aged mice. Moreover, the absence of TRPM2 improved age-dependent spatial memory deficits observed in Alzheimer's mice. Our results reveal the importance of TRPM2 for neuronal toxicity and memory impairments in an Alzheimer's mouse model and suggest that TRPM2 could be targeted for the development of therapeutic agents effective in the treatment of dementia.