UNLABELLED: We recently showed that inhibition of neuronal activity, glutamate uptake, or reversed-Na(+)/Ca(2+)-exchange with TTX, TFB-TBOA, or YM-244769, respectively, increases mitochondrial mobility in astrocytic processes. In the present study, we examined the interrelationships between mitochondrial mobility and Ca(2+) signaling in astrocyte processes in organotypic cultures of rat hippocampus. All of the treatments that increase mitochondrial mobility decreased basal Ca(2+). As recently reported, we observed spontaneous Ca(2+) spikes with half-lives of approximately 1 s that spread approximately 6 mum and are almost abolished by a TRPA1 channel antagonist. Virtually all of these Ca(2+) spikes overlap mitochondria (98%), and 62% of mitochondria are overlapped by these spikes. Although tetrodotoxin, TFB-TBOA, or YM-244769 increased Ca(2+) signaling, the specific effects on peak, decay time, and/or frequency were different. To more specifically manipulate mitochondrial mobility, we explored the effects of Miro motor adaptor proteins. We show that Miro1 and Miro2 are both expressed in astrocytes and that exogenous expression of Ca(2+)-insensitive Miro mutants (KK) nearly doubles the percentage of mobile mitochondria. Expression of Miro1(KK) had a modest effect on the frequency of these Ca(2+) spikes but nearly doubled the decay half-life. The mitochondrial proton ionophore, FCCP, caused a large, prolonged increase in cytosolic Ca(2+) followed by an increase in the decay time and the spread of the spontaneous Ca(2+) spikes. Photo-ablation of mitochondria in individual astrocyte processes has similar effects on Ca(2+). Together, these studies show that Ca(2+) regulates mitochondrial mobility, and mitochondria in turn regulate Ca(2+) signals in astrocyte processes. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: In neurons, the movement and positioning of mitochondria at sites of elevated activity are important for matching local energy and Ca(2+) buffering capacity. Previously, we demonstrated that mitochondria are immobilized in astrocytes in response to neuronal activity and glutamate uptake. Here, we demonstrate a mechanism by which mitochondria are immobilized in astrocytes subsequent to increases in intracellular [Ca(2+)] and provide evidence that mitochondria contribute to the compartmentalization of spontaneous Ca(2+) signals in astrocyte processes. Immobilization of mitochondria at sites of glutamate uptake in astrocyte processes provides a mechanism to coordinate increases in activity with increases in mitochondrial metabolism.