UNLABELLED: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia. Neuroinflammation appears to play an important role in AD pathogenesis. Ligands of the 18 kDa translocator protein (TSPO), a marker for activated microglia, have been used as positron emission tomography (PET) tracers to reflect neuroinflammation in humans and mouse models. Here, we used the novel TSPO-targeted PET tracer (18)F-GE180 (flutriciclamide) to investigate differences in neuroinflammation between young and old WT and APP/PS1dE9 transgenic (Tg) mice. In vivo PET scans revealed an overt age-dependent elevation in whole-brain uptake of (18)F-GE180 in both WT and Tg mice, and a significant increase in whole-brain uptake of (18)F-GE180 (peak-uptake and retention) in old Tg mice compared with young Tg mice and all WT mice. Similarly, the (18)F-GE180 binding potential in hippocampus was highest to lowest in old Tg > old WT > young Tg > young WT mice using MRI coregistration. Ex vivo PET and autoradiography analysis further confirmed our in vivo PET results: enhanced uptake and specific binding (SUV75%) of (18)F-GE180 in hippocampus and cortex was highest in old Tg mice followed by old WT, young Tg, and finally young WT mice. (18)F-GE180 specificity was confirmed by an in vivo cold tracer competition study. We also examined (18)F-GE180 metabolites in 4-month-old WT mice and found that, although total radioactivity declined over 2 h, of the remaining radioactivity, approximately 90% was due to parent (18)F-GE180. In conclusion, (18)F-GE180 PET scans may be useful for longitudinal monitoring of neuroinflammation during AD progression and treatment. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Microglial activation, a player in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis, is thought to reflect neuroinflammation. Using in vivo microPET imaging with a novel TSPO radioligand, (18)F-GE180, we detected significantly enhanced neuroinflammation during normal aging in WT mice and in response to AD-associated pathology in APP/PS1dE9 Tg mice, an AD mouse model. Increased uptake and specific binding of (18)F-GE180 in whole brain and hippocampus were confirmed by ex vivo PET and autoradiography. The binding specificity and stability of (18)F-GE180 was further confirmed by a cold tracer competition study and a metabolite study, respectively. Therefore, (18)F-GE180 PET imaging may be useful for longitudinal monitoring of neuroinflammation during AD progression and treatment and may also be useful for other neurodegenerative diseases.