PURPOSE: To evaluate the effect of contralateral electrographic involvement on memory performance (measured by neuropsychological and Wada memory testing) in patients with epilepsy associated with unilateral mesial temporal sclerosis (MTS). METHODS: We studied 51 patients with medically-refractory epilepsy associated with unilateral MTS (27 women, 30/51, left MTS) submitted to prolonged non-invasive video-EEG monitoring and bilateral Wada testing. According to ictal electrographic involvement, patients were classified as: Contralateral ictal involvement, when one or more seizures evolved with rhythmic activity in the temporal region contralateral to the MTS or exclusive ipsilateral ictal involvement if all seizures showed ictal EEG activity exclusively on the MTS side. Wada testing involved a twelve-item memory paradigm. Wada memory asymmetry score was calculated for each patient subtracting the number of recalled items after injection on the lesion side from the number of recalled items after contralateral injection. Expected asymmetry (EA) was considered if Wada memory asymmetry>0, and Symmetrical or Reversed memory asymmetry (S-RA) when </= 0. Neuropsychological testing was applied in the 51 patients and in 40 healthy controls. Verbal Memory was evaluated with the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT), considering the number of recalled items on immediate recall after the initial five consecutive encoding trials (RAVLT 6), a post-interference delayed (30 min) recall (RAVLT 7), and recall after 7 days. Nonverbal memory was tested with Wechsler Memory Scale-III (WMS-III) Faces subtests 1 e 2. RESULTS: Groups did not differ in demographic, clinical and video-EEG monitoring variables. S-RA was observed more frequently in the group with contralateral ictal involvement (57.2% vs. 27.0%; p: 0.03). Logistic regression analysis considering demographic, clinical, hippocampal volume and video-EEG monitoring variables showed contralateral ictal involvement as the only independent variable associated with S-RA (coefficient=1.32, p=0.029, odds ratio 3.77; 95% CI 1.1-12.47). Additionally, the patient group with contralateral ictal EEG involvement displayed worse verbal and nonverbal memory scores compared to healthy controls. CONCLUSION: In this cohort of unilateral MTS patients, contralateral ictal involvement was associated with decreased memory performance on Wada and on neuropsychological testing.