Detailed knowledge about the patterns of molecular alterations during epileptogenesis is a presupposition for identifying targets for preventive or disease-modifying approaches, as well as biomarkers of the disease. Large-scale differential proteome analysis can provide unique and novel perspectives based on comprehensive data sets informing about the complex regulation patterns in the disease proteome. Thus, we have completed an elaborate differential proteome analysis based on label-free LC-MS/MS in a rat model of epileptogenesis. Hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex tissues were sampled and analyzed separately at three key time points chosen for monitoring disease development following electrically-induced status epilepticus, namely, the early post-insult phase, the latency phase, and the chronic phase with spontaneous recurrent seizures. We focused the bioinformatics analysis on proteins linked to immune and inflammatory responses, because of the emerging evidence of the specific pathogenic role of inflammatory signalings during epileptogenesis. In the early post-insult and the latency phases, pathway enrichment analysis revealed an extensive over-representation of Toll-like receptor signaling, pro-inflammatory cytokines, heat shock protein regulation, and transforming growth factor beta signaling and leukocyte transendothelial migration. The inflammatory response in the chronic phase proved to be more moderate with differential expression in the parahippocampal cortex exceeding that in the hippocampus. The data sets provide novel information about numerous differentially expressed proteins, which serve as interaction partners or modulators in key disease-associated inflammatory signaling events. Noteworthy, a set of proteins which act as modulators of the ictogenic Toll-like receptor signaling proved to be differentially expressed. In addition, we report novel data demonstrating the regulation of different Toll-like receptor ligands during epileptogenesis. Taken together, the findings deepen our understanding of modulation of inflammatory signaling during epileptogenesis providing an excellent and comprehensive basis for the identification of target and biomarker candidates.