OBJECTIVE: Using the gamma-butyrolactone (GBL) model of absence seizures in Long-Evans rats, this study investigated if 2.5-6 Hz paroxysmal discharges (PDs) induced by GBL were synchronized among the thalamocortical system and the hippocampus, and whether inactivation of the hippocampus affected PDs. METHODS: Local field potentials were recorded by chronically implanted depth electrodes in the neocortex (frontal, parietal, visual), ventrolateral thalamus and dorsal hippocampal CA1 area. In separate experiments, multiple unit recordings were made at the hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cell layer, or the mid-septotemporal hippocampus was inactivated by local infusion of GABAA receptor agonist muscimol. RESULTS: As PDs developed following GBL injection, coherence of local field potentials at 2.5-6 Hz increased between the hippocampus and thalamus, and between the hippocampus and the neocortex. Hippocampal theta rhythm was disrupted when GBL induced immobility in the rats. The probability of hippocampal multiple unit firing significantly increased at 40-80 ms prior to the negative peak of thalamic PDs. Coherence between hippocampal multiple unit activity and thalamic field potentials at 2.5-6 Hz was significantly increased after GBL injection. Muscimol infusion to inactivate the mid-septotemporal hippocampus, as compared to saline infusion, significantly decreased the peak frequency of the PDs induced by GBL, decreased 30-120 Hz hippocampal gamma power, and hastened the transition of PDs to 1-2 Hz slow waves. SIGNIFICANCE: During GBL induced 2.5-6 Hz PDs, a hallmark of absence seizure, increased synchronization between the hippocampus and the thalamocortical network was indicated by frequency and temporal correlation analysis. These results suggest that the hippocampus was entrained by thalamocortical activity in the present model of absence seizures. Prolonged synchronization of the hippocampus may result in synaptic alterations that may explain the cognitive and memory deficits in some patients with absence seizures and absence status epilepticus.