OBJECTIVES: The water extracts of Cinnamomum cassia Blume bark (CCB; Lauraceae), Lonicera japonica Thunb. flower (LJT; Caprifoliaceae), and Agrimonia pilosa Ledeb. leaves (APL; Rosaceae) prevented amyloid-beta (25-35)-induced cell death in PC12 cells in our preliminary study. We evaluated whether long-term oral consumption of CCB, LJT, and APL improves cognitive dysfunction and glucose homeostasis in rats with experimentally induced AD-type dementia. METHODS: Male rats received hippocampal CA1 infusions of amyloid-beta (25-35, AD) or amyloid-beta (35-25, non-plaque forming, normal-controls, Non-AD-CON), at a rate of 3.6 nmol/day for 14 days. AD rats were divided into four groups receiving either 2% lyophilized water extracts of CCB, LJT, or APL or 2% dextrin (AD-CON) in high-fat diets (43% energy as fat). RESULTS: Hippocampal amyloid-beta deposition, tau phosphorylation, and expressions of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) (neruoinflammation markers) were increased, and insulin signaling decreased in AD-CON. CCB, LJT, and APL all prevented hippocampal amyloid-beta accumulation and enhanced hippocampal insulin signaling. CCB, LJT, and APL decreased TNF-alpha and iNOS in the hippocampus and especially APL exhibited the greatest decrease. AD-CON exhibited cognitive dysfunction in passive avoidance and water maze tests, whereas CCB, LJT, and APL protected against cognitive dysfunction, and APL was most effective and was similar to Non-AD-CON. AD-CON had less fat oxidation as an energy fuel, but it was reversed by CCB, LJT, and especially APL. APL-treated rats had less visceral fat than AD-CON rats. AD-CON rats exhibited impaired insulin sensitivity and increased insulin secretion during oral glucose tolerance test compared with Non-AD-CON, but CCB and APL prevented the impairment. DISCUSSION: These results supported that APL, LJT, and CCB effectively prevent the cognitive dysfunction and the impairment of energy and glucose homeostasis induced by amyloid-beta deposition by reducing neuroinflammation and enhancing insulin signaling. APL exhibited the greatest effectiveness for improving cognitive function.