PURPOSE: The overall objective was to elucidate cellular mechanisms by which G-CSF enhances recovery from traumatic brain injury in a hippocampal-dependent learning task. METHODS: Chimeric mice were prepared by transplanting bone marrow cells that express green fluorescent protein (GFP+) from a transgenic "green" mice into C57BL/6 mice. Two months later, the animals sustained mild controlled cortical impact (CCI) to the right frontal-parietal cortex, followed by G-CSF (100 mug/kg) treatment for 3 consecutive days. The primary behavioral end-point was performance on the radial arm water maze (RAWM) assessed before and after CCI (days 7 and 14). Secondary endpoints included a), motor performance on a rotating cylinder (rotarod), b) measurement of microglial and astroglial response, c) hippocampal neurogenesis, and d) measures of neurotrophic factors (BDNF, GDNF) in brain homogenates. RESULTS: G-CSF treatment resulted in significantly better performance on the rotorod at one week, and in the RAWM after one and two weeks. The cellular changes found 2 wks after CCI in the G-CSF group included increased numbers of hippocampal newborn neurons as well as astrocytosis and microgliosis in striatum and frontal cortex on both sides of brain. GFP+ cells that co-labeled with Iba1 (microglial marker) comprised a significant proportion of striatal microglia in G-CSF treated animals, indicating the capacity of G-CSF to increase microglial recruitment to the site of injury. Neurotrophic factors GDNF and BDNF, elaborated by activated microglia and astrocytes, were increased in G-CSF treated mice. CONCLUSIONS: G-CSF serves as a neurotrophic factor that increases hippocampal neurogenesis (or enhances survival of new-born neurons), and activates astrocytes and microglia. In turn, these activated glia release a plethora of cytokines and neurotrophic factors that contribute, in a poorly understood cascade, to the brain's repair response. G-CSF also acts directly on bone marrow-derived cells to enhance recruitment of microglia to the site of CCI from circulating monocytes to the site of CCI.