The medial septal area contains neurons which project to the hippocampal formation. A sizeable proportion of these septo-hippocampal neurons (SHNs) are cholinergic. About 40% of them also display a characteristic discharge pattern in rhythmic bursts. We hypothesized that SHNs with a rhythmically bursting activity (RBA) are the cholinergic ones. To test this hypothesis we studied the effects of acetylcholine synthesis blockade by hemicholinium-3 (HC-3) on the properties of the SHNs. HC-3 (16, 32 or 64 micrograms total dose) or saline were injected in the lateral ventricles of adult male Sprague-Dawley rats anesthetized with urethane. Extracellular recordings from SHNs in the medial septal area were obtained within hours after HC-3 injections (n = 24 animals). SHNs were identified by their antidromic response following electrical stimulation of the fimbria-fornix. The pharmacological properties of SHNs were studied in some animals using microiontophoretic applications from multibarreled electrodes filled with various neurotransmitters. The hippocampal rhythmic slow activity (RSA or theta) was abolished even after the lowest dose of HC-3 tested (16 micrograms). No significant change in SHNs conduction velocity or spontaneous activity was observed at any dose of HC-3. The percentage of SHNs with RBA was unchanged. In contrast the mean frequency of the RBA was decreased by HC-3 in a dose-dependent fashion. The mean frequency was lowest within the first 3 h after injection. Although the mean spontaneous activity was unchanged SHNs tended to have more spikes per burst. The effects of various neurotransmitters on SHNs were qualitatively unchanged after HC-3 injection. These results suggest that acetylcholine synthesis blockade by HC-3 leads not only to the disappearance of the hippocampal RSA in urethane-anesthetized animals, but also to a decrease in the frequency of the rhythmically bursting activity of the SHNs. Since the 4-Hz hippocampal theta is atropine-sensitive, the results provide indirect evidence that the SHNs with rhythmically bursting activity are the cholinergic SHNs.