BACKGROUND: Compounds that possess a pyrrolidone skeleton are a rich resource for the discovery of nootropic drugs. Oleracein E (OE), which possesses both tetrahydroisoquinoline and pyrrolidone skeletons, was first isolated from the medicinal plant Portulaca oleracea L. and was thought to be an active component in the cognition-improvement effect induced by this herb. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of OE on cognitive impairment in senescent mice and its underlying mechanism of action. METHOD: Senescent Kunming mice were established by the intraperitoneal injection of D-galactose (D-gal, 1250 mg/kg/d) and NaNO2 (90 mg/kg/d) for 8 weeks. OE (3 mg/kg/d, 15 mg/kg/d) was orally administered for 8 weeks, and the nootropic drug piracetam (PA, 400 mg/kg/d) was used as a positive control. A Morris water maze was used to assess cognitive ability. GSH and MDA levels and T-AOC, SOD, and CAT activities in the brain or plasma were determined. Hippocampal morphology was observed by HE staining, and expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 and the pro-apoptotic proteins Bax and Caspase-3 was observed by immunohistochemical staining. RESULTS: Large-dosage treatments with D-gal/NaNO2 for 8 weeks significantly reduced survival, impaired spatial memory capacity, compensatorily up-regulated GSH level and T-AOC and SOD activities, decreased CAT activity, and induced hippocampal neuronal damage and apoptosis as reflected by the apparent low expression of Bcl-2 and high expression of Bax and Caspase-3. OE significantly prolonged lifespan and was more potent than PA. Similar to PA, OE at 15 mg/kg/d improved memory capacity. The underlying mechanism of action was related to the reversal of abnormal brain antioxidant biomarkers (GSH, T-AOC, and SOD) to normal levels and the inhibition of hippocampal neuronal apoptosis. CONCLUSION: OE from P. oleracea is an active compound for improving cognitive function and is also a candidate nootropic drug for the treatment of age-related dementia.