UNLABELLED: The persistently active protein kinase Mzeta (PKMzeta) has been found to be involved in the formation and maintenance of long-term memory. Most of the studies investigating PKMzeta, however, have used either putatively unselective inhibitors or conventional knock-out animal models in which compensatory mechanisms may occur. Here, we overexpressed an active form of PKMzeta in rat hippocampus, a structure highly involved in memory formation, and embedded in several neural networks. We investigated PKMzeta's influence on synaptic plasticity using electrophysiological recordings of basal transmission, paired pulse facilitation, and LTP and combined this with behavioral cognitive experiments addressing formation and retention of both contextual memory during aversive conditioning and spatial memory during spontaneous exploration. We demonstrate that hippocampal slices overexpressing PKMzeta show enhanced basal transmission, suggesting a potential role of PKMzeta in postsynaptic AMPAR trafficking. Moreover, the PKMzeta-overexpressing slices augmented LTP and this effect was not abolished by protein-synthesis blockers, indicating that PKMzeta induces enhanced LTP formation in a protein-synthesis-independent manner. In addition, we found selectively enhanced long-term memory for contextual but not cued fear memory, underlining the theory of the hippocampus' involvement in the contextual aspect of aversive reinforced tasks. Memory for spatial orientation during spontaneous exploration remained unaltered, suggesting that PKMzeta may not affect the neural circuits underlying spontaneous tasks that are different from aversive tasks. In this study, using an overexpression strategy as opposed to an inhibitor-based approach, we demonstrate an important modulatory role of PKMzeta in synaptic plasticity and selective memory processing. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Most of the literature investigating protein kinase Mzeta (PKMzeta) used inhibitors with selectivity that has been called into question or conventional knock-out animal models in which compensatory mechanisms may occur. To avoid these issues, some studies have been done using viral overexpression of PKMzeta in different brain structures to show cognitive enhancement. However, electrophysiological experiments were exclusively done in knock-out models or inhibitory studies to show depletion of LTP. There was no study showing the effect of PKMzeta overexpression in the hippocampus on behavior and LTP experiments. To our knowledge, this is the first study to combine these aspects with the result of enhanced memory for contextual fear memory and to show enhanced LTP in hippocampal slices overexpressing PKMzeta.