The purpose of this study was to examine the structural and connective integration of developing hippocampal neurons grafted to ischemic lesions of the adult rat hippocampus. The 4-vessel occlusion model was used to cause transient cerebral ischemia which damages CA1 pyramidal cells in the dorsal hippocampus, but spares nonpyramidal neurons and afferents in the area. One week later, cell suspensions were made from the CA1 region of fetal (E18-20) rats and injected stereotaxically into the lesion. The recipient brains were examined 6 weeks to 6 months later for survival, morphology, and intrinsic and extrinsic connections of the grafts. The methods used included cell stains, histochemical staining for acetylcholinesterase (AChE), immunocytochemical staining for neuropeptides (cholecystokinin (CCK), somatostatin (SS), enkephalin (Enk) and an astrocytic marker, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), as well as tracing by retrograde axonal transport of fluorochromes and light and electron microscopy of anterograde axonal degeneration. The grafts survived well (80%) and were often quite large. They were well integrated in the lesioned host brain area, contained both pyramidal cells and neuropeptidergic neurons and displayed a near normal GFAP immunoreactivity for astrocytes. The latter contrasted the dense gliosis of the host ischemic lesion. Judged by the AChE staining the grafts were innervated by cholinergic host septohippocampal fibers. Ingrowth of host hippocampal commissural fibers was demonstrated by Fink-Heimer staining for degenerating nerve terminals following acute lesions of the hippocampal commissures. At the ultrastructural level degenerating, electron dense terminals of host commissural origin were found even deep inside the graft neuropil in synaptic contact with mainly dendritic spines. A transplant efferent connection to the host brain was demonstrated by retrograde fluorochrome tracing and consisted of a homotypic projection to more posterior levels of the ipsilateral host CA1 and subiculum. Minor abnormal, efferent projections to the host dentate molecular layer were shown in Timm staining. We conclude that fetal CA1 neurons grafted to one week old ischemic lesions of the dorsal CA1 in adult rats become structurally well incorporated and can establish nerve connections with the host brain.