To investigate the structural changes in the hippocampal region (subiculum, Ammon's horn, and area dentata) associated with speciation, the volumes of homologous components of this region of the forebrain were compared in the two closely related murine rodent species, Apodemus flavicollis (yellow-necked wood mice) and A. sylvaticus (long-tailed field mice), and in two geographically separated groups of A. sylvaticus. With the exception of the mossy fiber zone, no significant differences were found in the relative sizes of the components of Ammon's horn. Significant interspecific differences were found in the deep subiculum, in the intermediate (medial perforant path) and deep (commissural-associational) zones of the molecular layer of the area dentata, and in the hilus. A significant intraspecific difference was found in the combined intermediate and superficial (medial and lateral perforant path) zone of the dentate molecular layer. Differences found in the relative size of the hilus and the mossy fiber zone of Ammon's horn were complementary in that the combined volumes of these zones, which are both terminal fields of dentate granule cells, did not differ in the species. This finding provides evidence that the distribution of the terminal field of a projection system can be altered while the size of the terminal field is maintained. Within the hippocampal region, components of Ammon's horn appear well suited for quantitative comparative studies that span taxonomic units beyond the species level. In agreement with previous quantitative studies, differences in the volumes of components of Ammon's horn found in species of different orders are more likely to reflect phylogenetic trends rather than changes resulting from specializations of the particular species used. This is not true for the subiculum and the components of the area dentata. Experimentally induced changes in the connectivity of the hippocampal region are discussed in terms of the structural changes which may be responsible for the quantitative differences observed between the two species studied here.