UNLABELLED: The history, content and consequences of the highly-cited 1982 Brain Research paper by Halliwell and Adams are summarized. The paper pioneered the use of the single-electrode voltage clamp in mammalian brain slices, described 2 novel sub-threshold voltage-dependent ionic currents, IM and IQ/H, and suggested that cholinergic inputs "enabled" pyramidal cell firing in response to conventional synaptic input, the first example of central neuromodulation. The paper, published in Brain Research to give the first author appropriate importance, heralded an ongoing tidal wave of quantitative electrophysiology in mammalian central neurons. ORIGINAL ARTICLE ABSTRACT: Voltage-clamp analysis of muscarinic excitation in hippocampal neurons Pyramidal cells in the CA1 field of guinea pig hippocampal slices were voltage-clamped using a single microelectrode, at 23-30 degrees C. Small inwardly relaxing currents triggered by step hyperpolarizations from holding potentials of -80 to -40mV were investigated. Inward relaxations occurring for negative steps between -40mV and -70mV resembled M-currents of sympathetic ganglion cells: they were abolished by addition of carbachol, muscarine or bethanechol, as well as by 1mM barium; the relaxations appeared to invert at around -80mV; they became faster at more negative potentials; and the inversion potential was shifted positively by raising external K(+) concentration. Inward relaxations triggered by steps negative to -80mV, in contrast, appeared to reflect passage of another current species, which has been labeled IQ.Thus IQ did not invert negative to -80mV, it was insensitive to muscarinic agonizts or to barium, and it was blocked by 0.5-3mM cesium (which does not block IM). Turn-on of IQ causes the well known droop in the hyperpolarizing electrotonic potential in these cells. The combined effects of IQ and IM make the steady-state current-voltage relation of CA1 cells slightly sigmoidal around rest potential. It is suggested that activation of cholinergic septal inputs to the hippocampus facilitates repetitive firing off pyramidal cells by turning off the M-conductance, without much change in the resting potential of the cell. (c) 1982. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled SI:50th Anniversary Issue.