Remote ischemic preconditioning (RIPC) is an intriguing approach which exposes a remote organ/tissue to a non-lethal transient ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) in order to potentiate the resistance of the desired organ/tissue against the next unwanted I/R. It has been suggested that RIPC exerts its effect through neuronal and hormonal pathways. The underlying mechanisms of RIPC are obscure and should be elucidated. In this study, we induced RIPC in mice using 3 cycles of 5 min ischemia alternating with 5 min reperfusion of the left renal artery. Renal failure was induced in mice by intra-peritoneal (i.p.) injection of 200 mg/kg body weight of gentamicin twice per day for 4 consecutive days. Global hippocampal ischemia reperfusion (I/R) was performed by bilateral carotid artery occlusion for 20 min followed by reperfusion for 72 h. Moreover, the retention trial of passive avoidance test was determined 72 h after global ischemia. Histopathological changes of hippocampus neurons were observed using Nissl staining to detect neuronal loss. Finally, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase mediated dUTP nick end-labeling (TUNEL) was performed to assess the status of apoptotic cells in the hippocampus. The results of this study suggest that renal ischemic preconditioning is a good candidate for prevention of I/R-induced hippocampal injury. However, RRPC (remote renal preconditioning) failed to exert a neuroprotective effect in mice with renal failure (RF), indicating the probable role of a humoral factor which is released from kidneys in response to ischemia. In agreement with this hypothesis, treatment of mice with rhEPO (5000 IU/kg intraperitoneal) before induction of RRPC restored the neuroprotective effects of RRPC in RF mice. Accordingly, it is plausible to expect that erythropoietin is released from kidneys to act as a mediator for RRPC-induced neuroprotective effects. Renal ischemic preconditioning prevents I/R-induced hippocampal injury. In contrast, renal failure hampers protective effects of RRPC, while exogenous administration of erythropoietin (EPO) significantly prevents the inhibiting effects of renal failure.