UNLABELLED: Medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) grid cells exhibit firing fields spread across the environment on the vertices of a regular tessellating triangular grid. In rodents, the size of the firing fields and the spacing between the firing fields are topographically organized such that grid cells located more ventrally in MEC exhibit larger grid fields and larger grid-field spacing compared with grid cells located more dorsally. Previous experiments in brain slices from rodents have shown that several intrinsic cellular electrophysiological properties of stellate cells in layer II of MEC change systematically in neurons positioned along the dorsal-ventral axis of MEC, suggesting that these intrinsic cellular properties might control grid-field spacing. In the bat, grid cells in MEC display a functional topography in terms of grid-field spacing, similar to what has been reported in rodents. However, it is unclear whether neurons in bat MEC exhibit similar gradients of cellular physiological properties, which may serve as a conserved mechanism underlying grid-field spacing in mammals. To test whether entorhinal cortex (EC) neurons in rats and bats exhibit similar electrophysiological gradients, we performed whole-cell patch recordings along the dorsal-ventral axis of EC in bats. Surprisingly, our data demonstrate that the sag response properties and the resonance properties recorded in layer II neurons of entorhinal cortex in the Egyptian fruit bat demonstrate an inverse relationship along the dorsal-ventral axis compared with the rat. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: As animals navigate, neurons in medial entorhinal cortex (MEC), termed grid cells, discharge at regular spatial intervals. In bats and rats, the spacing between the firing fields of grid cells changes systematically along the dorsal-ventral axis of MEC. It has been proposed that these changes could be generated by systematic differences in the intrinsic cellular physiology of neurons distributed along the dorsal-ventral axis of MEC. The results from our study show that key intrinsic physiological properties of neurons in entorhinal cortex of the bat and rat change in the opposite direction along the dorsal-ventral axis of entorhinal cortex, suggesting that these intrinsic physiological properties cannot account in the same way across species for the change in grid-field spacing shown along the dorsal-ventral axis.