Recent studies suggest that nerve growth factor is present within the central nervous system where it may exert selective trophic effects on cholinergic neurons. We have measured the effects of nerve growth factor on septal cholinergic neurons in three-dimensional reaggregating cell cultures, a system which closely simulates the cellular environment in situ. Septal cells obtained from 15-day-old mouse embryos were dissociated into a single cell suspension and then allowed to reaggregate in culture in a rotary incubator shaker. After 17 days in culture, half of the reaggregates from a flask were sonicated for measurement of choline acetyltransferase activity, and the remaining reaggregates were processed for acetylcholinesterase histochemistry. Addition of nerve growth factor to medium containing septal reaggregates resulted in greater than a three-fold increase in choline acetyltransferase activity and in the number of acetylcholinesterase-positive cells, as well as an enhancement in the staining of acetylcholinesterase-positive fibers. All of these effects of nerve growth factor could be neutralized by antibodies to nerve growth factor. In order to evaluate the possible role of endogenous hippocampal-derived nerve growth factor, antiserum to nerve growth factor was added to the culture media containing septal-hippocampal coaggregates. After 21 days in culture, the presence of nerve growth factor antibodies did not qualitatively affect the pattern or density of cholinergic fibers observed. Synapse formation between cholinergic axons and hippocampal target cells was still in evidence as revealed by electron microscopy. However, there was a modest decrease in choline acetyltransferase activity (20%) and cholinergic cell number (30%) when compared with coaggregates grown in culture medium either without nerve growth factor antiserum or with non-immune serum. The magnitude of these effects was markedly less than the effects observed when exogenous nerve growth factor was added to septal cells grown alone in reaggregate culture. These results suggest that nerve growth factor may play a role during central cholinergic development, but that additional trophic mechanisms are likely to be required.