The present study aimed to investigate the role of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in drug-induced early cognitive impairment and the underlying mechanism concerning microRNA (miR)-30b. A mouse model of cognitive impairment was established by intraperitoneal injection of scopolamine (2 mg/kg body weight) for 13 days. Behavioral performance was assessed using the Morris water maze (MWM) test. The mRNA expression levels of PAI-1 and miR-30b were detected using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The protein expression levels of PAI-1 in the hippocampus and blood were determined using western blot analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. The MWM test demonstrated that, on days 3 and 4, the escape latency was significantly elevated in the model mice in comparison with control group (P<0.05). In addition, the length of swimming path was significantly increased (P<0.05), while the number of times of crossing the platform location was significantly reduced in the model mouse group (P<0.05) in comparison with the control group. qPCR demonstrated that the mRNA expression levels of PAI-1 in the model mice was significantly elevated in the hippocampus and blood in comparison with the control group (P<0.01). Furthermore, western blot analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay demonstrated that the protein expression levels of PAI-1 were significantly elevated in the hippocampus and blood in the model group, in comparison with the control group (P<0.05). Notably, the levels of miR-30b in the hippocampus and blood were significantly decreased in the model mice in comparison with the control group (P<0.01). To conclude, the expression levels of PAI-1 were significantly elevated in mice with scopolamine-induced cognitive impairment, which may be associated with the downregulation of miR-30b. The findings from the present study suggest that miR-30b may be involved in the regulation of PAI-1, which would contribute to the pathogenesis of cognitive impairment.