OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) on the expression of Ghrelin and mRNA expression of its receptor in functional dyspepsia (FD) rats. METHODS: Totally 80 rats were divided into the normal group, the model group, the drug therapy group, and the EA group according to random digit table, 20 in each group. FD model was duplicated by clipping tail modeling. Drug containing cisapride [2 mL/100 g, 0.09 g/(kg x d)] was administered to rats in the drug therapy group from the 3rd day after successful modeling, once per day. EA at Zusanli (ST36) (0.3-0.5 cun) and Taichong (LR3) (0.1-0.2 cun) was performed in the EA group. The twirling of needle was performed to the subsidence of needle, and then the needle was connected to HANS-200A Acupoint Nerve Stimulating Device using disperse-dense wave at 2 Hz, 2 mA, 30 min each time, once per day. Six days consisted of one therapeutic course, two courses in total with an interval of one day. The intestinal propulsive rate of ink was observed. Ghrelin protein expression in gastric tissue was detected by Western blot. mRNA expression of growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHS-R) in stomach, hypothalamus, and hippocampus was detected using Real-time PCR respectively. RESULTS: Compared with the normal group, the intestinal propulsive rate of ink, Ghrelin protein expression in gastric tissue, mRNA expression of GHS-R in stomach, hypothalamus, and hippocampus decreased in the model group (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). Compared with the model group, the intestinal propulsive rate of ink, Ghrelin protein expression in gastric tissue, mRNA expression of GHS-R in stomach, hypothalamus, and hippocampus increased in the EA group (P < 0.01); mRNA expression of GHS-R in stomach, hypothalamus, and hippocampus increased in the drug therapy group (P < 0.01). Compared with the drug therapy group, Ghrelin protein expression in gastric tissue, mRNA expression of GHS-R in hypothalamus increased in the EA group (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). CONCLUSION: EA could regulate Ghrelin content and GHS-R mRNA expression of FD rat hypothalamus, hippocampus, and gastric tissue, and promote the intestinal propulsive rate of ink.