The natural neurosteroid allopregnanolone exerts beneficial effects in animal models of neurodegenerative diseases, nervous system injury and peripheral neuropathies. It not only has anti-apoptotic activity, but also promotes proliferation of progenitor cells. With respect to using it as a therapeutic tool, such pleiotropic actions might create unwanted side effects. Therefore, we have synthesized allopregnanolone analogs and analyzed their neuroprotective and proliferative effects to identify compounds with higher efficiency and less ambiguous biological actions. Proliferation-promoting effects of 3alpha and 3beta isomers of 3-O-allyl-allopregnanolone and 12 oxo-allopregnanolone were studied in adult subventricular zone stem cell cultures and in primary hippocampal cultures by measuring 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation. Neuroprotective activity against amyloid beta 42-induced cell death was determined by quantifying caspase 3/7 activity. The 3alpha isomers significantly stimulated proliferation in all culture systems, whereas the 3beta isomers were ineffective. The stimulatory effect of 3alpha-O-allyl-allopregnanolone was significantly higher than that of allopregnanolone. In neural stem cell cultures, 3alpha-O-allyl-allopregnanolone specifically enhanced proliferation of Nestin-positive progenitors. In addition, it promoted the differentiation of doublecortin-positive neurons. In neural stem cell cultures treated with amyloid beta 42, both the alpha and beta isomers of O-allyl- allopregnanolone showed increased neuroprotective activity as compared to allopregnanolone, completely preventing amyloid-induced caspase 3/7 activation. The 12 oxo-allopregnanolone analogs were ineffective. These results identify structural allopregnanolone analogs with higher anti-apoptotic and proliferation-promoting activity than the natural neurosteroid. Interestingly, stereoisomers of the analogs were found to have distinct profiles of activity raising the possibility of exploiting the neuroprotective properties of neurosteroids with or without simultaneously stimulating neurogenesis. Cover Image for this issue: doi: 10.1111/jnc.13344.