The objective of the present study was to explore metabolic correlates to the appearance of postischemic seizures and the enhancement of brain damage observed in subjects that are made hyperglycemic prior to the induction of ischemia. To that end, transient forebrain ischemia of 10-min duration was induced in normo- and hyperglycemic rats, with subsequent measurements of local CMRglc (LCMRglc) after 3, 6, 12, and 18 h of recirculation. We posed the questions of whether postischemic depression of LCMRglc is exaggerated by preischemic hyperglycemia and whether there are signs of localized increases in LCMRglc in hyperglycemic rats, reflecting subclinical seizure activity. The results confirmed the presence of a long-lasting postischemic depression of LCMRglc in normoglycemic rats. This depression was partially but not tightly related to the degree of reduction of local CBF during ischemia. The depression was most pronounced in neocortical areas and in the hippocampus, but notably it was less pronounced in the densely ischemic caudoputamen. Little or no reduction of LCMRglc was observed in moderately or mildly ischemic structures such as the hypothalamus, red nucleus, and cerebellum. Preischemic hyperglycemia markedly accentuated the postischemic depression of LCMRglc. For example, although the subjects quickly regained wakefulness and motility, they had LCMRglc values in neocortical areas that remained below 50% of control. Corresponding but quantitatively less pronounced reductions in LCMRglc were observed in other areas. Notably, preischemic hyperglycemia reduced postischemic LCMRglc also in areas that showed only moderate to mild reductions in CBF during the ischemia. The results thus demonstrate that preischemic hyperglycemia has pronounced metabolic effects in the postischemic recovery period. The data provide no indication that postischemic seizures, which develop after a recovery period of approximately 24 h, are preceded by the appearance of hypermetabolic "seizure" foci.