BACKGROUND: It is hypothesized that the phenomenology of major depressive disorder (MDD) is subserved by disturbances in the structure and function of brain circuits; however, findings of structural abnormalities using MRI have been inconsistent. Generalized q-sampling imaging (GQI) methodology provides an opportunity to assess the functional integrity of white matter tracts in implicated circuits. METHODS: The study population was comprised of 16 outpatients with MDD (mean age 44.81+/-2.2 years) and 30 age- and gender-matched healthy controls (mean age 45.03+/-1.88 years). We excluded participants with any other primary mental disorder, substance use disorder, or any neurological illnesses. We used T1-weighted 3D MRI with voxel-based morphometry (VBM) and vertex-wise shape analysis, and GQI with voxel-based statistical analysis (VBA), graph theoretical analysis (GTA) and network-based statistical (NBS) analysis to evaluate brain structure and connectivity abnormalities in MDD compared to healthy controls correlates with clinical measures of depressive symptom severity, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale 17-item (HAMD) and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS). RESULTS: Using VBM and vertex-wise shape analyses, we found significant volumetric decreases in the hippocampus and amygdala among subjects with MDD (p<0.001). Using GQI, we found decreases in diffusion anisotropy in the superior longitudinal fasciculus and increases in diffusion probability distribution in the frontal lobe among subjects with MDD (p<0.01). In GTA and NBS analyses, we found several disruptions in connectivity among subjects with MDD, particularly in the frontal lobes (p<0.05). In addition, structural alterations were correlated with depressive symptom severity (p<0.01). LIMITATIONS: Small sample size; the cross-sectional design did not allow us to observe treatment effects in the MDD participants. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide further evidence indicating that MDD may be conceptualized as a brain disorder with abnormal circuit structure and connectivity.