UNLABELLED: Behavioral states are commonly considered global phenomena with homogeneous neural determinants. However, recent studies indicate that behavioral states modulate spiking activity with neuron-level specificity as a function of brain area, neuronal subtype, and preceding history. Although functional connectivity also strongly depends on behavioral state at a mesoscopic level and is globally weaker in non-REM (NREM) sleep and anesthesia than wakefulness, it is unknown how neuronal communication is modulated at the cellular level. We hypothesize that, as for neuronal activity, the influence of behavioral states on neuronal coupling strongly depends on type, location, and preceding history of involved neurons. Here, we applied nonlinear, information-theoretical measures of functional connectivity to ensemble recordings with single-cell resolution to quantify neuronal communication in the neocortex and hippocampus of rats during wakefulness and sleep. Although functional connectivity (measured in terms of coordination between firing rate fluctuations) was globally stronger in wakefulness than in NREM sleep (with distinct traits for cortical and hippocampal areas), the drop observed during NREM sleep was mainly determined by a loss of inter-areal connectivity between excitatory neurons. Conversely, local (intra-area) connectivity and long-range (inter-areal) coupling between interneurons were preserved during NREM sleep. Furthermore, neuronal networks that were either modulated or not by a behavioral task remained segregated during quiet wakefulness and NREM sleep. These results show that the drop in functional connectivity during wake-sleep transitions globally holds true at the cellular level, but confine this change mainly to long-range coupling between excitatory neurons. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Studies performed at a mesoscopic level of analysis have shown that communication between cortical areas is disrupted in non-REM sleep and anesthesia. However, the neuronal determinants of this phenomenon are not known. Here, we applied nonlinear, information-theoretical measures of functional coupling to multi-area tetrode recordings from freely moving rats to investigate whether and how brain state modulates coordination between individual neurons. We found that the previously observed drop in functional connectivity during non-REM (NREM) sleep can be explained by a decrease in coupling between excitatory neurons located in distinct brain areas. Conversely, intra-area communication and coupling between interneurons are preserved. Our results provide significant new insights into the neuron-level mechanisms responsible for the loss of consciousness occurring in NREM sleep.