BACKGROUND: Extrasynaptic gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors that contain the delta subunit (deltaGABAA receptors) contribute to memory performance. Dysregulation of deltaGABAA receptor expression, which occurs in some neurological disorders, is associated with memory impairment. Mice lacking deltaGABAA receptors (Gabrd) exhibit deficits in their ability to distinguish between similar memories, a process which is referred to as pattern separation. The CA3 and dentate gyrus subfields of the hippocampus regulate pattern separation, raising the possibility that synaptic plasticity is impaired in these regions in Gabrd mice. Although long-term potentiation (LTP), the most widely studied form of synaptic plasticity, is normal in the dentate gyrus of Gabrd mice, LTP in the CA3 subfield has not been studied. Here, we tested the hypothesis that LTP is reduced in the CA3 subfield of Gabrd mice. METHODS: LTP of extracellular field postsynaptic potentials was studied in the mossy fiber (MF)-CA3 pathway using hippocampal slices from Gabrd and wild-type (WT) mice. We also examined paired pulse responses and input-output relationships at MF-CA3 synapses. RESULTS: MF-CA3 LTP was reduced in Gabrd mice, as evidenced by decreased potentiation of field postsynaptic potentials (WT: 178.3% +/- 16.1% versus Gabrd: 126.3% +/- 6.9%; P = 0.0091). Thus, the deletion of deltaGABAA receptors is associated with impaired plasticity. Bicuculline (BIC), a GABAA receptor antagonist, reduced plasticity in WT but not in Gabrd mice (WT + BIC: 123.9% +/- 7.6% versus Gabrd + BIC: 136.5% +/- 7.0%). Paired pulse responses and input-output relationships did not differ between the genotypes (all Ps > 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Both genetic deletion and pharmacological blockade of deltaGABAA receptors impair MF-CA3 LTP, suggesting that deltaGABAA receptors are necessary for synaptic plasticity in the CA3 subfield. Drugs that enhance deltaGABAA receptor function may reverse deficits in synaptic plasticity in the CA3 subfield and improve pattern separation in neurological disorders.