Tramadol abuse is one of the most frequent health problems in Egypt and worldwide. In most cases, tramadol abused by men face a problem with premature ejaculation. Tramadol like other opioids induces a decrease in plasma antioxidant levels, which may reflect a failure of the antioxidant defense mechanism against oxidative damage. The present work aimed to study the possible deleterious effects of oral administration of tramadol on brain and lung tissues in rats. Twenty adult male albino rats were divided into two groups; a control administered with normal saline and tramadol-treated (40mg/kg b.w.) group for 20 successive days. At the end of experimental period, blood was collected and specimens from brains and lungs were taken for histopathological and molecular studies. Malondialdehyde (MDA), reduced glutathione (GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) activities were measured in serum of control and tramadol-treated groups. Brain and lung specimens were histopathological evaluated using light microscopy. The expression levels of apoptotic related genes; Bcl-2, Bax and Caspase-3 were study in brain and lung tissues using RT-PCR analysis. We recorded a significant increase MDA level, while antioxidant enzymes; GSH, SOD and CAT were significantly decreased after tramadol-treatment. The obtained results revealed that tramadol induced a remarkable histomorphological changes in rats' brains (cerebral cortex and hippocampus) and severe histopathological changes in rats' lung when compared to that of control. On molecular level, the expression of the pro-apoptotic Bax and Caspase-3 showed a significant increase whereas the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 decreased markedly indicating that tramadol is harmful at cellular level and can induce apoptotic changes in brain tissues. Our data confirmed the risk of increased oxidative stress, neuronal and pulmonary damage due to tramadol abuse. Although tramadol is reported to be effective in pain management, its toxicity should be kept in mind.