BACKGROUND: The aim of this volumetric study was to explore the neuroanatomical correlates of the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test (FCSRT) and the Delayed Matching-to-Sample-48 items (DMS-48), two tests widely used in France to assess verbal and visual anterograde memory. We wanted to determine to what extent the two tests rely on the medial temporal lobe, and could therefore be predictive of Alzheimer's disease, in which pathological changes typically start in this region. METHODS: We analysed data from a cohort of 138 patients with mild cognitive impairment participating in a longitudinal multicentre clinical research study. Verbal memory was assessed using the FCSRT and visual recognition memory was evaluated using the DMS-48. Performances on these two tests were correlated to local grey matter atrophy via structural MRI using voxel-based morphometry. RESULTS: Our results confirm the existence of a positive correlation between the volume of the medial temporal lobe and the performance on the FCSRT, prominently on the left, and the performance on the DMS-48, on the right, for the whole group of patients (family-wise error, P < 0.05). Interestingly, this region remained implicated only in the subgroup of patients who had deficient scores on the cued recall of the FCSRT, whereas the free recall was associated with prefrontal aspects. For the DMS-48, it was only implicated for the group of patients whose performances declined between the immediate and delayed trial. Conversely, temporo-parietal cortices were implicated when no decline was observed. Within the medial temporal lobe, the parahippocampal gyrus was prominently involved for the FCSRT and the immediate trial of the DMS-48, whereas the hippocampus was solely involved for the delayed trial of the DMS-48. CONCLUSIONS: The two tests are able to detect an amnestic profile of the medial temporal type, under the condition that the scores remain deficient after the cued recall of the FCSRT or decline on the delayed recognition trial of the DMS-48. Strategic retrieval as well as perceptual/attentional processes, supported by prefrontal and temporo-parietal cortices, were also found to have an impact on the performances. Finally, the implication of the hippocampus appears time dependent, triggered by a longer delay than the parahippocampus, rather than determined by the sense of recollection or the encoding strength associated with the memory trace.