BACKGROUND: A number of space activities (e.g., extravehicular astronaut rescue, cooperation in satellite services, space station supplies, and assembly) are implemented directly or assisted by remote robotic arms. Our study aimed to reveal those individual characteristics which could positively influence or even predict teleoperation performance of such a space robotic arm. METHODS: There were 64 male volunteers without robot operation experience recruited for the study. Their individual characteristics were assessed, including spatial cognitive ability, cognitive style, and personality traits. The experimental tasks were three abstracted teleoperation tasks of a simulated space robotic arm: point aiming, line alignment, and obstacle avoidance. Teleoperation performance was measured from two aspects: task performance (completion time, extra distance moved, operation slips) and safety performance (collisions, joint limitations reached). The Pearson coefficients between individual characteristics and teleoperation performance were examined along with performance prediction models. RESULTS: It was found that the subjects with relatively high mental rotation ability or low neuroticism had both better task and safety performance (|r| = 0.212 approximately 0.381). Subjects with relatively high perspective taking ability or high agreeableness had better task performance (r = -0.253; r = -0.249). Imagery subjects performed better than verbal subjects regarding both task and safety performance (|r| = 0.236 approximately 0.290). Compared with analytic subjects, wholist subjects had better safety performance (r = 0.300). Additionally, extraverted subjects had better task performance (r = -0.259), but worse safety performance (r = 0.230). CONCLUSIONS: Those with high spatial cognitive ability, imagery and wholist cognitive style, low neuroticism, and high agreeableness were seen to have more advantages in working with the remote robotic arm. These results could be helpful to astronaut selection and training for space station missions. Pan D, Zhang Y, Li Z, Tian Z. Association of individual characteristics with teleoperation performance. Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2016; 87(9):772-780.