Microglia-mediated clearance of amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) via Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling may play an important role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, as the disease progresses, activated microglia appear to become incapable of clearing Abeta deposits. Because repeated exposure to a TLR4 ligand leads to a diminished response of monocytes/macrophages to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and because aggregated Abeta is a TLR4 ligand, we hypothesize that chronic exposure of microglia to Abeta deposits may induce a state of Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling dysfunction, leading to decreased Abeta clearance and accelerated disease progression. LPS or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was injected into the hippocampus of AD-model (TgAPP/PS1) and wild-type (non-Tg) mice before and after the onset of Abeta deposition, at age 2 and 12 months, respectively. Brain specimens were collected 7 days post-injection and analyzed for microglial activation and Abeta load. While LPS-injected 2-month-old non-Tg mice showed 48-fold and 11-fold greater Iba1 immunoreactivity in the neocortex and hippocampus, respectively, compared with PBS-injected mice, LPS-injected 2-month-old TgAPP/PS1 mice had 61-fold and 13-fold increases in the neocortex and hippocampus, respectively. LPS injection activated microglia more strongly in TgAPP/PS1 mice than in non-Tg mice at 2 months of age. In contrast, at 12 months of age, Iba1 immunoreactivity of microglia was increased 541-fold and 38-fold in the neocortex and hippocampus, respectively, in LPS-injected non-Tg mice and 2.7-fold and 3.3-fold in the neocortex and hippocampus, respectively, in LPS-injected TgAPP/PS1 mice. Surprisingly, LPS injection decreased CD45 immunoreactivity in TgAPP/PS1 mice but increased it in non-Tg mice at 12 months. Although microglia in 12-month-old non-Tg mice showed stronger response to LPS than 2-month-old non-Tg mice, microglia in TgAPP/PS1 mice exhibited diminished immune response to LPS during aging. Our data indicate that microglial TLR4 signaling is altered in an AD mouse model and suggest that altered TLR4 signaling may contribute to Abeta accumulation in the brain.