When parts of the brain suffer from damage, certain functional deficits or impairments are the expected and typical outcome. A myriad of examples show such negative consequences, which afford the daily tasks of neurologists, neuropsychologists, and also behavioral neuroscientists working with experimental brain lesions. Compared to lesion-induced deficits, examples for functional enhancements or facilitation after brain lesions are rather rare and usually not well studied. Here, the mammalian hippocampus seems to provide an exception, since substantial evidence shows that its damage can have facilitatory behavioral effects under certain conditions. This review will address these effects and their possible mechanisms. It will show that facilitatory effects of hippocampal lesions, although mostly studied in rats, can be found in many mammalian species, that is, they are apparently not species-specific. Furthermore, they can be found with various lesion techniques, from tissue ablation, to neurotoxic damage, and from damage of hippocampal structure itself to damage of fiber systems innervating it. The major emphasis of this review, however, lies on the behavioral effects and their interpretations. Thus, facilitatory effects can be found in several learning paradigms, especially active avoidance, and some forms of Pavlovian and instrumental conditioning. These will be discussed in light of pertinent theories of hippocampal function, such as inhibition, spatial cognition, and multiple memory systems theories, which state that facilitatory effects of hippocampal lesions may reflect the loss of interference between hippocampal spatial and striatal procedural cognition. Using the example of the rat sequential reaction time task, it will also be discussed how such lesions can have direct and indirect consequences on certain behavioral readouts. A final note will advocate considering possible functional facilitation also in neurologic patients, especially those with hippocampal damage, since such a strategy might provide new avenues for therapeutic treatments.