Considering the complicated pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), multi-targets have become a focus in the discovery of drugs for treatment of this disease. In the current work, we established a multi-target strategy for discovering active reagents capable of suppressing both Abeta level and Tau hyperphosphorylation from natural products, and found that the ethanol extract of Thamnolia vermicularis (THA) was able to improve learning ability in APP/PS1 transgenic mice by inhibiting both Abeta levels and Tau hyperphosphorylation. SH-SY5Y and CHO-APP/BACE1 cells and primary astrocytes were used in cell-based assays. APP/PS1 transgenic mice [B6C3-Tg(APPswe, PS1dE9)] were administered THA (300 mg.kg(-1).d(-1), ig) for 100 d. After the administration was completed, the learning ability of the mice was detected using a Morris water maze (MWM) assay; immunofluorescence staining, Congo red staining and Thioflavine S staining were used to detect the senile plaques in the brains of the mice. ELISA was used to evaluate Abeta and sAPPbeta contents, and Western blotting and RT-PCR were used to investigate the relevant signaling pathway regulation in response to THA treatment. In SH-SY5Y cells, THAlpha (1, 10, 20 mug/mL) significantly stimulated PI3K/AKT/mTOR and AMPK/raptor/mTOR signaling-mediated autophagy in the promotion of Abeta clearance as both a PI3K inhibitor and an AMPK indirect activator, and restrained Abeta production as a suppressor against PERK/eIF2alpha-mediated BACE1 expression. Additionally, THA functioned as a GSK3beta inhibitor with an IC50 of 1.32+/-0.85 mug/mL, repressing Tau hyperphosphorylation. Similar effects on Abeta accumulation and Tau hyperphosphorylation were observed in APP/PS1 transgenic mice treated with THA. Furthermore, administration of THA effectively improved the learning ability of APP/PS1 transgenic mice, and markedly reduced the number of senile plaques in their hippocampus and cortex. The results highlight the potential of the natural product THA for the treatment of AD.