BACKGROUND: Discoveries that microglia-mediated neuroinflammation is involved in the pathological process of depression provided a new strategy for novel antidepressant therapy. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) is a nuclear receptor regulating inflammation and microglial polarization and, therefore, a potential target for resolving depressive disorders. Our hypothesis was that antidepressant effects could be achieved through anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective activities by PPARgamma-dependent microglia-modulating agents. METHODS: Chronic mild stress (CMS) treatment was performed on C57BL/6 mice for 6 weeks. After 3 weeks with the CMS procedure, depressive-like behaviors were evaluated by sucrose preference (SP), tail suspension test (TST), forced swimming test (FST), and locomotor activity. Pioglitazone was administered intragastrically once per day for 3 weeks at different doses. Neuroinflammatory cytokines were determined by real time-PCR (RT-PCR), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and western blot. The activated microglial state was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. N9 microglial cells were subjected to lipopolysaccharide, pioglitazone, and GW9662 to discuss the phenotype of activated microglia by RT-PCR, ELISA, and western blot. RESULTS: It was demonstrated that the PPARgamma agonist pioglitazone (2.5 mg/kg) ameliorated depression-like behaviors in CMS-treated mice, as indicated by body weight (BW), the SP test, the FST, and the TST. The amelioration of the depression was blocked by the PPARgamma antagonist GW9662. The expression of M1 markers (IL-1beta, IL-6, TNFalpha, iNOS, and CCL2) increased, and the gene expression of M2 markers (Ym1, Arg1, IL-4, IL-10, and TGFbeta) decreased in the hippocampus of the stress-treated mice. Pioglitazone significantly inhibited the increased numbers and morphological alterations of microglia in the hippocampus, reduced the elevated expression of microglial M1 markers, and increased the downgraded expression of microglial M2 markers in C57BL/6 mice exposed to CMS. In an in vitro experiment, pioglitazone reversed the imbalance of M1 and M2 inflammatory cytokines, which is correlated with the inhibition of nuclear factor kB activation and is expressed in LPS-stimulated N9 microglial cells. CONCLUSIONS: We showed that pioglitazone administration induce the neuroprotective phenotype of microglia and ameliorate depression-like behaviors in CMS-treated C57BL/6 mice. These data suggested that the microglia-modulating agent pioglitazone present a beneficial choice for depression.