BACKGROUND: Epilepsy patients have distinct immune/inflammatory cell profiles and inflammatory mediator levels in the blood. Although the neural origin of inflammatory cells and mediators has been implied, few studies have measured these inflammatory components in the human brain itself. This study examines the brain levels of chemokines (8), cytokines (14), and vascular injury mediators (3) suspected of being altered in epilepsy. METHODS: Soluble protein extracts of fresh frozen resected hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and temporal cortex from 58 medically refractory mesial temporal lobe epilepsy subjects and 4 nonepileptic neurosurgical subjects were assayed for 25 inflammation-related mediators using ultrasensitive low-density arrays. RESULTS: Brain mediator levels were compared between regions and between epileptic and nonepileptic cases, showing a number of regional and possible epilepsy-associated differences. Eotaxin, interferon-gamma, interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-12 p70, IL-17A, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 levels were highest in the hippocampus, the presumptive site of epileptogenesis. Surprisingly, IL-1beta and IL-1alpha were lowest in the hippocampus, compared to cortical regions. In the temporal cortex, IL-1beta, IL-8, and MIP-1alpha levels were highest, compared to the entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus. The most pronounced epilepsy-associated differences were decreased levels of eotaxin, IL-1beta, C-reactive protein, and vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1 and increased IL-12 p70 levels. Caution must be used in interpreting these results, however, because nonepileptic subjects were emergent neurosurgical cases, not a control group. Correlation analyses of each mediator in each brain region yielded valuable insights into the regulation of these mediator levels in the brain. Over 70 % of the associations identified were between different mediators in a single brain region, providing support for local control of mediator levels. Correlations of different mediators in different brain regions suggested more distributed control mechanisms, particularly in the hippocampus. Interestingly, only four mediators showed robust correlations between the brain regions, yet levels in three of these were significantly different between regions, indicating both global and local controls for these mediators. CONCLUSIONS: Both brain region-specific and epilepsy-associated changes in inflammation-related mediators were detected. Correlations in mediator levels within and between brain regions indicated local and global regulation, respectively. The hippocampus showed the majority of interregional associations, suggesting a focus of inflammatory control between these regions.