INTRODUCTION: Radiation therapy plays an essential role in the treatment of brain tumors, but neurocognitive deficits remain a significant risk, especially in pediatric patients. In recent trials, hippocampal sparing techniques are applied to reduce these adverse effects. Here, we investigate dose-dependent effects of ionizing radiation (IR) on juvenile hippocampal neurogenesis. Additionally, we evaluate the radioprotective potential of resveratrol, a plant polyphenol recognized for its bifunctional tumor-preventive and anticancer effects. METHODS: Organotypic entorhinal-hippocampal slice cultures from transgenic nestin-CFPnuc C57BL/J6 mice, postnatal days 3-6, were irradiated on a X-ray machine (4.5, 8, 12, and 16 Gy, single doses) after about 2 weeks. Nestin-positive neural stem cells were counted at a confocal live imaging microscope 0, 2, 4, 14, 25, and 42 days after IR. Resveratrol (15 mumol/L) was added 2 hr before and 24 hr after IR. Proliferation and cell death were assessed by BrdU pulse label, 48 hr after and by propidium iodide staining 96 hr after IR. GFAP- and NeuN-positive cells were counted 42 days after IR in cryosectioned immunofluorescence-stained slices. RESULTS: The observed age-related changes of nestin-positive stem cells in the organotypic slice culture model resembled the reduction of neural stem cells in vivo. IR (4.5-16 Gy) led to a dose-dependent damage of the neural stem cell pool in the dentate gyrus. No recovery was seen within 42 days after doses from 4.5 Gy onward. The decline of nestin-positive cells was paralleled by increased cell death and decreased proliferation. The number of GFAP-positive cells was significantly enhanced. No significant change was detected in the overall NeuN-positive cell population, whereas the number of newborn, NeuN/BrdU double-positive neurons was reduced. Resveratrol treatment reversed the irradiation-induced decline of neural stem cells. CONCLUSION: The neuroprotective action of resveratrol on irradiated hippocampal tissue warrants further investigation as a possible supplement to hippocampal sparing procedures.