Two distinct protein cofactors, p35 and p39, independently activate Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5), which plays diverse roles in normal brain function and the pathogenesis of many neurological diseases. The initial discovery that loss of p35 impairs neuronal migration in the embryonic brain prompted intensive research exploring the function of p35-dependent Cdk5 activity. In contrast, p39 expression is restricted to the postnatal brain and its function remains poorly understood. Despite the robustly increased Cdk5 activity during neuronal differentiation, which activator is responsible for enhancing Cdk5 activation and how the two distinct activators direct Cdk5 signaling to govern neuronal network formation and function still remains elusive. Here we report that p39, but not p35, is selectively upregulated by histone acetylation-mediated transcription, which underlies the robust increase of Cdk5 activity during rat and mouse neuronal differentiation. The loss of p39 attenuates overall Cdk5 activity in neurons and preferentially affects phosphorylation of specific Cdk5 targets, leading to aberrant axonal growth and impaired dendritic spine and synapse formation. In adult mouse brains, p39 deficiency results in dysregulation of p35 and Cdk5 targets in synapses. Moreover, in contrast to the proepileptic phenotype caused by the lack of p35, p39 loss leads to deficits in maintaining seizure activity and induction of immediate early genes that control hippocampal excitability. Together, our studies demonstrate essential roles of p39 in neuronal network development and function. Furthermore, our data support a model in which Cdk5 activators play nonoverlapping and even opposing roles to govern balanced Cdk5 signaling in the postnatal brain. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Neuronal network development requires tightly regulated activation of Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) by two distinct cofactors, p35 and p39. Despite the well-known p35-dependent Cdk5 function, why postnatal neurons express abundant p39 in addition to p35 remained unknown for decades. In this study, we discovered that selective upregulation of p39 is the underlying mechanism that accommodates the increased functional requirement of Cdk5 activation during neuronal differentiation. In addition, we demonstrated that p39 selectively directs Cdk5 to phosphorylate protein substrates essential for axonal development, dendritic spine formation, and synaptogenesis. Moreover, our studies suggest opposing roles of p39 and p35 in synaptic Cdk5 function and epileptic responses, arguing that cooperation between Cdk5 activators maintains balanced Cdk5 signing, which is crucial for postnatal brain function.