An emerging avenue for recalcitrant neurodegenerative disease treatment is neural progenitor cell (NPC) transplantation. In this study, we investigated the effectiveness of two different delivery routes of human-derived NPC inoculation: injection into the common carotid artery or unilateral stereotactic implantation into the degenerating cerebellum and hippocampus of spastic Han-Wistar (sHW) rats, a model of ataxia. At 30 days of age, sHW mutants were implanted with osmotic pumps preloaded with cyclosporine. Ten days after pump implantation, the animals were given either 3,000,000 live human-derived NPCs (hNPCs; n = 12) or 3,000,000 dead NPCs (dNPCs; n = 12) injected into the common carotid artery, or were given two unilateral implantations of 500,000 hNPCs into the cerebellum and 500,000 hNPCs into the hippocampus of each sHW rat (n = 12) or 500,000 dNPCs by unilateral implantation into the cerebellum and hippocampus (n = 12). We also compared treated sHW rats to untreated sHW rats: normal rats (n = 12) and sibling sHW rats (n = 12). Motor activity and animal weights were monitored every 5 days to ascertain effectiveness of the two types of delivery methods compared to the untreated mutant and normal animals. Mutant rats with hNPC implantations, but not dNPC or carotid artery injections, showed significant deceleration of motor deterioration (p < 0.05). These mutants with hNPC implantations also retained weight longer than dNPC mutants did (p < 0.05). At the end of the experiment, animals were sacrificed for histological evaluation. Using fluorescent markers (Qtracker) incorporated into the hNPC prior to implantation and human nuclear immunostaining, we observed few hNPCs in the brains of carotid artery-injected mutants. However, significant numbers of surviving hNPCs were seen using these techniques in mutant cerebellums and hippocampi implanted with hNPC. Our results show that direct implantation of hNPCs reduced ataxic symptoms in the sHW rat, demonstrating that stereotactic route of stem cell delivery correlates to improved clinical outcomes.