There is considerable overlap in the neural regions and intracellular signalling pathways implicated in anxiety and fear, although less is known in females. Here, we investigated whether unconditioned and conditioned fear are associated with distinct patterns of expression of extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1 and -2 (ERK1/2), protein kinase B (Akt), and calcineurin (CaN) (proteins that are key regulators of the expression of and/or memory processes of fear and anxiety) in the dorsal and ventral hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex, and amygdala (important regions in neural fear circuitry) of adult female rats, and used a multivariate approach to find patterns of signalling that might discriminate between the different states of fear. To isolate fear to the conditioned cue from generalized fear to the test context, rats were conditioned to an auditory tone (i.e. tone paired with footshock) and twenty-four hours later exposed to a novel context in the presence or absence of the conditioned cue. A third group that was exposed to the conditioning context without undergoing fear conditioning was included to control for unconditioned responses to the testing procedures, which are anxiogenic. A discriminate function analysis and MANOVA determined that hippocampal signalling best discriminated the three groups from each other. The addition of values for plasma concentrations of corticosterone and progesterone (as indices of activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal stress axis) to statistical analyses increased the separation of the three groups. There was high degree of association among the three signalling molecules in the four brain regions within each group. There was an absence of the associations between the medial prefrontal cortex and the amygdala in the cued fear recall group that were strong for the non-conditioned group. These results demonstrated unique neuronal and hormonal signalling profiles associated with unconditioned, generalized, and conditioned fear expression in females and highlight the importance of including appropriate comparisons to best discriminate between these different emotional states.