Soluble oligomers of amyloid beta-protein (oAbeta) isolated from the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients have been shown experimentally (in the absence of amyloid plaques) to impair hippocampal synaptic plasticity, decrease synapses, induce tau hyperphosphorylation and neuritic dystrophy, activate microglial inflammation, and impair memory in normal adult rodents. Nevertheless, there has been controversy about what types of oligomers actually confer these AD-like phenotypes. Here, we show that the vast majority of soluble Abeta species obtained from brains of humans who died with confirmed AD elute at high molecular weight (HMW) on nondenaturing size-exclusion chromatography. These species have little or no cytotoxic activity in several bioassays. However, incubation of HMW oAbeta in mildly alkaline buffer led to their quantitative dissociation into low molecular weight oligomers ( approximately 8-70 kDa), and these were now far more bioactive: they impaired hippocampal LTP, decreased neuronal levels of beta2-adrenergic receptors, and activated microglia in wt mice in vivo Thus, most soluble Abeta assemblies in AD cortex are large and inactive but under certain circumstances can dissociate into smaller, highly bioactive species. Insoluble amyloid plaques likely sequester soluble HMW oligomers, limiting their potential to dissociate. We conclude that conditions that destabilize HMW oligomers or retard the sequestration of their smaller, more bioactive components are important drivers of Abeta toxicity. Selectively targeting these small, cytotoxic forms should be therapeutically beneficial. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Oligomers of amyloid beta-protein (oAbeta) are tought to play an important role in Alzheimer's disease (AD), but there is confusion and controversy about what types and sizes of oligomers have disease-relevant activity. Using size-exclusion chromatography and three distinct measures of bioactivity, we show that the predominant forms of Abeta in aqueous extracts of AD brain are high molecular weight (HMW) and relatively inactive. Importantly, under certain conditions, the abundant HMW oAbeta can dissociate into low molecular weight species, and these low molecular weight oligomers are significantly more bioactive on synapses and microglia than the HMW species from which they are derived. We conclude that conditions that destabilize HMW oAbeta or retard the sequestration of smaller, more bioactive components are important drivers of Abeta toxicity.