Synapsins are epilepsy susceptibility genes that encode phosphoproteins reversibly associated with synaptic vesicles. Synapsin II (SynII) gene deletion produces a deficit in inhibitory synaptic transmission, and this defect is thought to cause epileptic activity. We systematically investigated how SynII affects synchronous and asynchronous release components of inhibitory transmission in the CA1 region of the mouse hippocampus. We found that the asynchronous GABAergic release component is diminished in SynII-deleted (SynII(-)) slices. To investigate this defect at different interneuron subtypes, we selectively blocked either N-type or P/Q-type Ca(2+) channels. SynII deletion suppressed the asynchronous release component at synapses dependent on N-type Ca(2+) channels but not at synapses dependent on P/Q-type Ca(2+) channels. We then performed paired double-patch recordings from inhibitory basket interneurons connected to pyramidal neurons and used cluster analysis to classify interneurons according to their spiking and synaptic parameters. We identified two cell subtypes, presumably parvalbumin (PV) and cholecystokinin (CCK) expressing basket interneurons. To validate our interneuron classification, we took advantage of transgenic animals with fluorescently labeled PV interneurons and confirmed that their spiking and synaptic parameters matched the parameters of presumed PV cells identified by the cluster analysis. The analysis of the release time course at the two interneuron subtypes demonstrated that the asynchronous release component was selectively reduced at SynII(-) CCK interneurons. In contrast, the transmission was desynchronized at SynII(-) PV interneurons. Together, our results demonstrate that SynII regulates the time course of GABAergic release, and that this SynII function is dependent on the interneuron subtype.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Deletion of the neuronal protein synapsin II (SynII) leads to the development of epilepsy, probably due to impairments in inhibitory synaptic transmission. We systematically investigated SynII function at different subtypes of inhibitory neurons in the hippocampus. We discovered that SynII affects the time course of GABA release, and that this effect is interneuron subtype specific. Within one of the subtypes, SynII deficiency synchronizes the release and suppresses the asynchronous release component, while at the other subtype SynII deficiency suppresses the synchronous release component. These results reveal a new SynII function in the regulation of the time course of GABA release and demonstrate that this function is dependent on the interneuron subtype.