OBJECTIVE: Study on the influence of the cerebral Ischemia-reperfusion Injury (IRI) on mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate (ATP) content and ATPase activity in hippocampus of rats, as well as the protective effect of propofol on IRI in rats. METHODS: A total of 40 male SD rats were randomly divided into 5 groups: sham operation group (Group A), ischemia reperfusion control group (Group B) and ischemic reperfusion with propofol pretreatment group (C group). Group C was further divided into three sub groups according to the different doses of propofol: Group C1 (50 mg/kg), Group C2 (100 mg/kg) and Group C3 (150 mg/kg). The rats from Groups B and C were applied for the IRI model preparation by blockage of the blood flow in arteria carotis communis. For the Groups A, arteria carotis communis were separated without blockage of the blood flow. Before preparation of IRI model for rats in Group C, different doses of propofol were intraperitoneally injected into the rats. For rats in Groups A and B, only saline solution with same volume was intraperitoneally injected at the same time. The ultra-structures of mitochondria in hippocampus of rats were observed under transmission electron microscope, and the mitochondrial degeneration rate was counted. The contents of ATP were determined by HPLC and the ATPase activity was characterized by ATPase activity assay kit. RESULTS: (1) Mitochondria in the hippocampus from Groups B and C showed different degrees of ultrastructural damage and more significant mitochondrial degeneration than those from Group A. The degree of damage and the rate of degeneration were in the order of B > C1 > C2 > C3 and the difference was statistically significant (P < 0.01). (2) The contents of ATP and the ATPase activity in hippocampus from Groups B and C were significantly lower than those of Group A, while these indices from Group C were significantly higher than those in the B group, and the sequence was C3 > C2 > C1, indicating that the ATP content and ATPase activity were significantly correlated with the dose of propofol, and the difference was statistically significant (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: In summary, the contents of ATP and ATPase activity in hippocampus of rats can be decreased by cerebral IRI. The structure and function of the impaired mitochondria in IRI rats could be significantly improved by propofol, and the improvement effect is related to the dose of propofol.