To explore the effect of total flavonoids of Scutellaria barbata on cognitive function and nogo-A expression in the hippocampus region in cerebral ischemia model in gerbils. 30 gerbils were randomly divided into model group, sham operation group, large dose of total flavonoids of Scutellaria barbata group (large dose group), middle dose of total flavonoids of Scutellaria barbata group (middle dose group) and small dose of total flavonoids of Scutellaria barbata group (small dose group), with 6 cases in each group. All the groups except the sham operation group were received bilateral common carotid artery ligation to establish the cerebral ischemia model in gerbils. After that, the large, middle and small doses groups were given 400mg/kg, 200mg/kg and 100mg/kg of total flavonoids of Scutellaria barbata respectively, while the other two groups were injected with sodium chloride for 4 continuous weeks. At the 5th and 8th week after modeling, the cognitive function (e.g. escape latency period and original platform crossing times) of the gerbils in the three groups were detected by Morris water maze test. Moreover, the nogo-A expressions in the hippocampus region were detected by immunohistochemical staining method at the 8th week. The escape latency period and platform crossing times at the 5th and 8th week after modeling in the large dose group were significantly higher than the rest groups (except slam operation group) (p<0.05), while the difference was not significant when compared with slam operation group (p>0.05). The difference of the gray value of nogo-A positive cells in hippocampus in the large dose group was not significant compared with middle dose group and sham operation group (p>0.05), while it was significant compared with model group and small dose group (p<0.05). Large dose of total flavonoids of Scutellaria barbata can obviously improve the cognitive function in cerebral ischemia model in gerbils by reducing nogo-A expression in the hippocampus region.