To better understand the endocrine- and immune-response pattern during reproduction in a fish species having parental care behaviors and also to accumulate the endocrine- and immune-related data for future explanations of the low reproductive efficiency in seahorse species, the variations of immune factors and sex steroids in the plasma of the male lined seahorse Hippocampus erectus at different breeding stages, i.e., pre-pregnancy, pregnancy (early, middle, and late periods), and post-pregnancy, were investigated in the present study. The immune factors included monocytes/leucocytes (M/L), leucocyte phagocytic rate (LPR), immunoglobulin M (Ig M), interleukin-2 (IL-2), interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha), and lysozyme (LZM). The sex steroids included testosterone (T), 11-ketotestosterone (11-KT), 11beta-hydroxytestosterone (11beta-OHT), 17alpha-methyltestosterone (17alpha-MT), 17beta-estradiol (E2), and 17alpha-hydroxy-20beta-dihydroprogesterone (17alpha-20beta-P). Moreover, the immune metabolic activity of epithelium cells in the brood pouch at different breeding stages was also analyzed through ultrastructural observations of the abundance of cytoplasmic granules, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, lysosomes, and exocytosis. The results show that a higher immune level was observed during pregnancy, particularly in the early and middle periods, and a lower immune level was noted during pre-pregnancy. Correspondingly, the epithelium cells in the brood pouch also showed a stronger immune metabolic activity during pregnancy and weaker activity during pre-pregnancy. Four sex steroids of T, 11beta-OHT, 17alpha-MT, and E2 were higher during pre-pregnancy and lower during post-pregnancy, whereas 11-KT and 17alpha-20beta-P, which were positively correlated with part immune factors, were higher during pregnancy. No negative correlations between sex steroids and immune factors were observed. In conclusion, the higher immune competence during pregnancy may indicate that parental care could improve immunity, which may be the major factor for no immunosuppressive effect of sex steroids during reproduction in the seahorse H. erectus, unlike noncaregiving fishes in which inhibitions of sex steroids on immunity are frequently observed. Moreover, higher 11-KT and 17alpha-20beta-P during pregnancy than during pre-pregnancy and post-pregnancy may suggest that these two steroids are also involved in parental care regulation.