The location and density of postsynaptic alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors is controlled by scaffolding proteins within the postsynaptic density (PSD). SAP97 is a PSD protein with two N-terminal isoforms, alpha and beta, that have opposing effects on synaptic strength thought to result from differential targeting of AMPA receptors into distinct synaptic versus extrasynaptic locations, respectively. In this study, we have applied dSTORM super resolution imaging in order to localize the synaptic and extrasynaptic pools of AMPA receptors in neurons expressing alpha or betaSAP97. Unexpectedly, we observed that both alpha and betaSAP97 enhanced the localization of AMPA receptors at synapses. However, this occurred via different mechanisms: alphaSAP97 increased PSD size and consequently the number of receptor binding sites, whilst betaSAP97 increased synaptic receptor cluster size and surface AMPA receptor density at the PSD edge and surrounding perisynaptic sites without changing PSD size. alphaSAP97 also strongly enlarged presynaptic active zone protein clusters, consistent with both presynaptic and postsynaptic enhancement underlying the previously observed alphaSAP97-induced increase in AMPA receptor-mediated currents. In contrast, betaSAP97-expressing neurons increased the proportion of immature filopodia that express higher levels of AMPA receptors, decreased the number of functional presynaptic terminals, and also reduced the size of the dendritic tree and delayed the maturation of mushroom spines. Our data reveal that SAP97 isoforms can specifically regulate surface AMPA receptor nanodomain clusters, with betaSAP97 increasing extrasynaptic receptor domains at peri-synaptic and filopodial sites. Moreover, betaSAP97 negatively regulates synaptic maturation both structurally and functionally. These data support diverging presynaptic and postsynaptic roles of SAP97 N-terminal isoforms in synapse maturation and plasticity. As numerous splice isoforms exist in other major PSD proteins (e.g., Shank, PSD95, and SAP102), this alternative splicing may result in individual PSD proteins having divergent functional and structural roles in both physiological and pathophysiological synaptic states.