PURPOSE: Total salvianolic acid (TSA) is extracted from salvia miltiorrhiza; however, to date, there has been limited characterization of its effects on metabolites in Alzheimer's disease model-APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. The main objective of this study was to investigate the metabolic changes in 7-month-old APPswe/PS1dE9 mice treated with TSA, which protects against learning and memory impairment. METHODS: APPswe/PS1dE9 mice were treated with TSA (30 mg/kg.d and 60 mg/kg.d, i.p.) and saline (i.p.) daily from 3.5 months old for 14 weeks; saline-treated (i.p.) WT mice were included as the controls. The effects of TSA on learning and memory were assessed by a series of behavioral tests, including the NOR, MWM and step-through tasks. The FBG and plasma lipid levels were subsequently assessed using the GOPOD and enzymatic color methods, respectively. Finally, the concentrations of Abeta42, Abeta40 and metabolites in the hippocampus of the mice were detected via ELISA and GC-TOF-MS, respectively. RESULTS: At 7 months of age, the APPswe/PS1dE9 mice treated with TSA exhibited an improvement in the preference index (PI) one hour after the acquisition phase in the NOR and the preservation of spatial learning and memory in the MWM. Treatment with TSA substantially decreased the LDL-C level, and 60 mg/kg TSA decreased the CHOL level compared with the plasma level of the APPswe/PS1dE9 group. The Abeta42 and Abeta40 levels in the hippocampus were decreased in the TSA-treated group compared with the saline-treated APPswe/PS1dE9 group. The regulation of metabolic pathways relevant to TSA predominantly included carbohydrate metabolism, such as sorbitol, glucose-6-phosphate, sucrose-6-phosphate and galactose, vitamin metabolism involved in cholecalciferol and ascorbate in the hippocampus. CONCLUSIONS: TSA induced a remarkable amelioration of learning and memory impairments in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice through the regulation of Abeta42, Abeta40, carbohydrate and vitamin metabolites in the hippocampus and LDL-C and CHOL in the plasma.