The aim of this study was to explore the action characters of total flavonoids from MDQ on cerebral ischemic tolerance with blood stasis. Fully understanding the mechanism of action of total flavonoids from MDQ is helpful for the development of new drugs and the utilization of resources. Male Wistar rat model of blood stasis was established by injecting dexamethasone into the intramuscular side of the thigh. Then they were given related drugs via an intragastric administration for a successive 10 days. After 7 days, the following occurred: firstly, the method of blocking the bilateral common carotid artery (CCA) was used for 10 min, followed by a restoration of perfusion. After 72 h, we performed a temporary occlusion of the rat's middle cerebral artery for 2 h with an intraluminal thread method. This was followed by reperfusion for 24 h, respectively, to establish the rat model of cerebral ischemic tolerance with blood stasis. Viscosity of the whole blood was measured after the last administration was given blood. Brain was removed, and then the activity of ATP enzyme and T-SOD was determined. To observe the pathological changes of the hippocampus area by HE staining, and the expression of Bcl-2 and Bax were observed by immunohistochemical method. The rat model of cerebral ischemic tolerance with blood stasis was copied successfully. The whole blood viscosity, the activity of NOS, the content of Gluin in the ischemic brain in the IPC model group and the ischemia-reperfusion group were increased significantly. The activity of ATPase was decreased significantly. Compared with the ischemia-reperfusion model group, the activity of ATPase and the whole blood viscosity in the ischemic preconditioning (IPC) group were increased significantly. The activity of NOS and the content of Gluin were decreased significantly. The degree of pathological injury of the brain tissue was also relieved significantly. Total flavonoids of MDQ were used, improving blood circulation, improving energy metabolism, activating endogenous anti-oxidative capability, enhancing the antiapoptotic effect, and relieving the injury of the nerve cell. Hence, the use of MDQ flavonoids improves the tolerance ability of cerebral ischemia.