The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of "nourishing liver and kidney" acupuncture therapy on motor and cognitive deficits, and the underlying mechanism following cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) via increasing the expression of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and synaptophysin (SYN) in the hippocampus. Healthy adult male SD rats were randomly divided into sham operation group (n=51), model group (n=51), acupuncture group (n=51) and acupuncture control group (n=51). The middle cerebral I/R model was established. Acupunctures were performed in the acupuncture group and acupuncture control group at acupoints of Taixi (K103), Taichong (ST09) of both sides, for 30 min once daily every morning. The animals in the sham operation group and model group were conventionally fed in the cage, without any intervention therapy. The rats of each group were assessed with modified neurological severity scores (mNSS). The expression of BDNF and SYN in the hippocampus was detected by immunohistochemical SP method and the synaptic structure in hippocampus area was assessed morphologically and quantitatively at the 3rd, 7th and 14th day. The Morris water Maze (MWM) test was used to evaluate the rats' learning and memory abilities on the 15th day after acupuncture. The animals in the acupuncture control group and sham operation group presented no neurological deficit. In the acupuncture group, the nerve functional recovery was significantly better than that in the model group at the 7th and 14th day after modeling. The average MWM escape latency in the acupuncture group was shorter than that in the model group at the 3rd, 4th and 5th day. The number of crossings of the platform quadrant in the acupuncture group was significantly more than that in the model group. At the each time point, the expression levels of BDNF and SYN in the hippocampal regions increased significantly in the model group as compared with the sham operation group and the acupuncture control group. In the acupuncture group, the expression levels of BDNF at the 7th and 14th day increased more significantly than those in the model group. In the acupuncture group, the expression levels of SYN at the each time point increased more significantly than those in the model group. The post-synaptic density (PSD) was significantly increased and the synapse cleft width was narrowed in the acupuncture group as compared with other groups. The synaptic curvatures were improved obviously in the acupuncture group in contrast to the model group. It was concluded that the "nourishing liver and kidney" acupuncture therapy has positive effects on behavioral recovery, as well as learning and memory abilities, probably by promoting the expression of BDNF and SYN, and synaptic structure reconstruction in the ipsilateral hippocampus after I/R in rats. The "nourishing liver and kidney" acupuncture therapy can promote the functional recovery in rats after cerebral ischemia injury.