BACKGROUND: In recent years, proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) was considered to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of depression. In addition, P2X7 receptor (P2X7R), a member of the purinergic receptor family, which is predominantly present on microglia, as well as on astrocytes and neurons in lesser amounts in the central nervous system, was suggested to be involved in the processing and releasing of IL-1beta. Here, we investigated the role of P2X7R in the pathogenesis of depression. METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to chronic unpredictable stressors (CUS) for 3 weeks. At the end of week 1, 2, and 3, extracellular ATP, caspase 1, IL-1beta, and components and activation of NLRP3 inflammasome (nucleotide-binding, leucine-rich repeat, pyrin domain containing 3) were evaluated as biomarker of neuroinflammation. In separate experiments, the rats were microinjected with P2X7R agonists ATP, BzATP, and saline into the hippocampus, respectively, or exposed to CUS combined with hippocampal microinjection with P2X7R antagonist, BBG and A438079, and saline, respectively, for 3 weeks, followed by exposed to forced swimming test and open-field test. Moreover, we also evaluated the depressive and anxiety-like behavior of P2X7-null mice in forced swimming test, open-field test, and elevated plus maze. RESULTS: Along with stress accumulation, extracellular ATP, cleaved-caspase 1, IL-1beta, and ASC were significantly enhanced in the hippocampus, but P2X7R and NLRP3 were not. Immunoprecipitation assay indicated that along with the accumulation of stress, assembly of NLRP3 inflammasome and cleaved caspase 1 in NLRP3 inflammasome were significantly increased. Moreover, antagonists of P2X7R, either BBG or A438079, prevented the development of depressive-like behaviors induced by chronic unpredictable stress in rats. Meanwhile, we could not observe any depressive-like or anxiety-like behaviors of P2X7-null mice after they had been exposed to CUS. The results implied that P2X7 knockout could impede the development of depressive-like and anxiety-like behaviors induced by CUS. In contrast, chronic administration of agonists of P2X7R, either ATP or BzATP, could induce depressive-like behaviors. CONCLUSIONS: The activation of P2X7R and subsequent NLRP3 inflammasome in hippocampal microglial cells could mediate depressive-like behaviors, which suggests a new therapeutic target for the prevention and treatment of depression.