Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a prevalent disorder that causes considerable disability in social functioning and is a risk factor for physical diseases. Recent clinical reports have demonstrated a marked association between MDD and physiological dyshomeostasis induced by metabolic disorders, including diabetes, hormone abnormalities and autoimmune diseases. The authors of the present study have previously analyzed comparative gene expression profiles in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of a chronic mild stress (CMS) animal model of MDD. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (Hnf4alpha) was identified as a central regulator that exerted significant influence on genes associated with physiological homeostasis. The aim of the present study was to investigate: i) the molecular mechanism of the depressive state in the PFC, and ii) the involvement of genes extracted from the comparative gene expression profiles, particularly those applicable to MDD in clinical practice. Core analysis of the previous PFC microarray results was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Subsequently, IPA was used to search for molecules that are regulated by Hnf4alpha, and exist in the PFC and serum. From the core analysis, 5 genes that are associated with cell death and are expressed in the cortex were selected. Four of the extracted genes, insulinlike growth factor 1, transthyretin, serpin family A member 3 and plasminogen, were markedly affected by Hnf4alpha. S100 calciumbinding protein A9 (S100a9) and alpha2-HS-glycoprotein (Ahsg) were also chosen as they exist in serum and are also affected by Hnf4alpha. A significant group difference in the expression of these two genes was detected in the PFC, thalamus and hippocampus. The protein levels of AHSG and S100A9 in the PFC and hippocampus of the CMS group increased significantly when compared with the control group. These findings support the close association of Hnf4alpha (through genes such as S100a9 and Ahsg) with the development of various diseases induced by deregulation of physiological homeostasis during the progression of MDD.