BACKGROUND: Jieyuanshen decoction (JYAS-D) - a traditional Chinese medicine was invented by Professor Nie based on classic formulas, chaihu jia longgu muli decoction has been proved as having favorable curative effects on depression in clinical practices. The aim of this study was to investigate the antidepressant effects and its molecular mechanism of JYAS-D. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The model of depression was established by Chronic Unpredictable Stress. Different doses (8.2 g/kg, 16.3 g/kg, 32.7 g/kg) of JYAS-D was orally administered; Fluoxetine was orally administered with 10mg/kg. All treatments lasted for 28 days. Sucrose preference and open-field tests were adopted to observe the behavior of rats. OPA (ortho-phthalaldehyde) derivatization method was used to detect the contents of amino acid neurotransmitter. RIA (Radiation immunity analysis) method was used to measure the serum concentrations of CORT (Corticosterone), ACTH (Adrenocorticotropic hormone) and CRH (Corticotropin-releasing hormone). ELISA (Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay) method was adopted to examine the contents of Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and Mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) in hippocampus. RESULTS: Compared with the model group, sucrose preference was increased in all treatment groups. The concentration of serum CORT was reduced in the middle dose of JYAS-D and control groups; the concentration of serum ACTH was reduced in the low and high-dose of JYAS-D; the concentration of serum CRH was reduced in the middle and high-dose of JYAS-D. The content of hippocampus GR was increased in the middle and high-dose of JYAS-D; the content of hippocampus Glu (Glutamic acid) was reduced among the low, middle and high-dose of JYAS-D and fluoxetine group, the ratio of Glu/gamma-GABA (y-aminobutyric acid was reduced in the low and high-dose of JYAS-D. CONCLUSION: JYAS-D had a significant antidepressant-like effect on rat model through regulating serum concentration of CORT, ACTH and CRH, increasing the content of hippocampus GR and regulating the equilibrium of amino acids neurotransmitter.