Mutations and deletions of the interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein like 1 (IL1RAPL1) gene, located on the X chromosome, are associated with intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). IL1RAPL1 protein is located at the postsynaptic compartment of excitatory synapses and plays a role in synapse formation and stabilization. Here, using primary neuronal cultures and Il1rapl1-KO mice, we characterized the role of IL1RAPL1 in regulating dendrite morphology. In Il1rapl1-KO mice we identified an increased number of dendrite branching points in CA1 and CA2 hippocampal neurons associated to hippocampal cognitive impairment. Similarly, induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons from a patient carrying a null mutation of the IL1RAPL1 gene had more dendrites. In hippocampal neurons, the overexpression of full-length IL1RAPL1 and mutants lacking part of C-terminal domains leads to simplified neuronal arborization. This effect is abolished when we overexpressed mutants lacking part of N-terminal domains, indicating that the IL1RAPL1 extracellular domain is required for regulating dendrite development. We also demonstrate that PTPdelta interaction is not required for this activity, while IL1RAPL1 mediates the activity of IL-1beta on dendrite morphology. Our data reveal a novel specific function for IL1RAPL1 in regulating dendrite morphology that can help clarify how changes in IL1RAPL1-regulated pathways can lead to cognitive disorders in humans.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Abnormalities in the architecture of dendrites have been observed in a variety of neurodevelopmental, neurodegenerative, and neuropsychiatric disorders. Here we show that the X-linked intellectual disability protein interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein like 1 (IL1RAPL1) regulates dendrite morphology of mice hippocampal neurons and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons from a patient carrying a null mutation of IL1RAPL1 gene. We also found that the extracellular domain of IL1RAPL1 is required for this effect, independently of the interaction with PTPdelta, but IL1RAPL1 mediates the activity of IL-1beta on dendrite morphology. Our data reveal a novel specific function for IL1RAPL1 in regulating dendrite morphology that can help clarify how changes in IL1RAPL1-regulated pathways can lead to cognitive disorders in humans.