BACKGROUND: Iron deficiency in children can have significant neurological consequences, and iron supplementation is an effective treatment of choice. However, traditional routes of iron supplementation do not allow efficient iron delivery to the brain due to the presence of the blood-brain barrier. So an easily delivered iron formulation with high absorption efficiency potentially could find widespread application in iron deficient infants. RESULTS: In this study, we have developed and characterized a nanovesicular formulation of ferric ammonium citrate (ferric ammonium citrate nanoliposomes, FAC-LIP) and have shown that it can increase brain iron levels in rats following nasal administration. FAC was incorporated into liposomes with high efficiency (97%) and the liposomes were small (40 nm) and stable. Following intranasal delivery in rats, FAC-LIP significantly increased the iron content in the olfactory bulb, cerebral cortex, striatum, cerebellum and hippocampus, and was more efficient at doing so than FAC alone. No signs of apoptosis or abnormal cell morphology were observed in the brain following FAC-LIP administration, and there were no significant changes in the levels of SOD and MDA, except in the cerebellum and hippocampus. No obvious morphological changes were observed in lung epithelial cells or tracheal mucosa after nasal delivery, suggesting that the formulation was not overtly toxic. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, nanoscale FAC-LIP proved an effective system delivering iron to the brain, with high encapsulation efficiency and low toxicity in rats. Our studies provide the foundation for more detailed investigations into the applications of niosomal nasal delivery of liposomal formulations of iron as a simple and safe therapy for iron deficiency anemia. Graphical abstract The diagrammatic sketch of "Nasal delivery of nanoliposome-encapsulated ferric ammonium citrate can increase the iron content of rat brain". Nanoliposome-encapsulated ferric ammonium citrate (FAC-LIP) was successfully prepared and intranasal administration of FAC-LIP increased both the total iron contents and iron storage protein (FTL) expression in rat olfactory bulb, cerebral cortex, striatum and hippocampus, compared with those of FAC groups. Moreover, there was not overtly toxic affects to brain, lung epithelial cells and tracheal mucosa.