The discovery of intrinsic epileptogenicity of the hypothalamic hamartoma (HH) marked a new area in understanding the associated clinical syndrome, often manifesting as progressive epileptic encephalopathy. However, therapeutic procedures targeting the HH proved to be inefficient to cure seizures in up to 50% of cases, whereas in cases with partial improvement, the electroclinical patterns of persisting seizures suggest an involvement of distant cortical regions. The concept of kindling-like secondary epileptogenesis has been suggested as a possible underlying mechanism. Yet the role of the hypothalamic lesion in the pathophysiology of the syndrome remains debatable. In the Strasbourg-Kork series, the best outcomes were obtained when the duration of epilepsy before endoscopic HH surgery did not exceed 10 years. In two patients with HH ablation followed at a later time by a temporal lobectomy, only this second surgical step allowed complete seizure freedom. These findings suggest the existence of an independent, third stage of secondary epileptogenesis in human. In the Grenoble series, stereotactic intracerebral recordings (stereo electroencephalography [SEEG]) of five HH cases demonstrated that gelastic/dacrystic seizures were correlated with discharges within the HH, whereas other seizure types were related to discharges affecting cortical regions, which sometimes seemed to be triggered by HH. In the Marseille series, two cases explored by SEEG provided evidence of extended epileptogenicity outside the limits of the HH, forming complex epileptogenic networks, with HH still triggering clusters of neocortical seizures in the first, but not obligatory involved in spontaneous seizures in the second case. Taken together, our data argue for the existence of dynamic ictal network organization, with possible "kindling-like" relationships between the HH and the neocortex or widespread epileptogenesis. Despite the existence of secondary epileptogenesis, the epileptogenic zone could still be limited to the hamartoma, for which early surgical treatment should be pragmatically considered as a first surgical step.