Dementia has been shown to be closely related with neuronal degeneration and/or a decrease in the activity of neural stem cells in many brain regions, including the hippocampus. It has been recently established that Neogenin is involved in the cell fate determination by regulating Oct3/4, SOX and Nanog, notable embryonic cell markers, expressions in pre-implantation mouse embryos. Further, Neogenin expression at both mRNA and protein levels is manifest in many brain regions in mice, but it remains unclear whether Neogenin expression is prerequisite for the maintenance of neural stem cells, particularly, playing a critical role in the hippocampus, a brain region known to be involved in memory generation and consolidation. Here, we provide evidence that supports that Neogenin is implicated in the maintenance of neural stem cells in the hippocampus by enhancing PCNA expressions. We have performed RT-PCR analysis, Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry with fetal rat brain tissues at E18 for Neogenin mRNA and protein profiling. Neuronal cells obtained from the hippocampus were subjected to FACS analysis for the identification of Neogenin-positive and/or neuronal stem cell marker-positive cells. Western blotting results showed that Neogenin expression was higher in the hippocampal region compared to the cortical region. FACS analysis results indicated that a significant population of fetal rat neuronal cells exhibiting Neogenin expression also displayed SOX2 expression, implying co-expression of Neogenin and SOX2 in the hippocampus. Next, we investigated the role of Neogenin through gain- and loss-of-function studies with cultured rat hippocampal neurons. Neogenin down-regulation by small hairpin RNAs led to a dramatic decrease in SOX2 expression while its up-regulation by overexpression caused an increase in PCNA expression, a cell proliferation marker, compared with none-transfected cells. From this study, we propose a model whereby Neogenin could maintain neural stem cell population and control cell proliferation.