The aims of this review are: 1) to describe which cholinergic neurons are affected in brain neurodegenerative diseases leading to dementia; 2) to discuss the possible causes of the degeneration of the cholinergic neurons, 3) to summarize the functional consequences of the cholinergic deficit. The brain cholinergic system is basically constituted by three populations of phenotypically similar neurons forming a series of basal forebrain nuclei, the midpontine nuclei and a large population of striatal interneurons. In Alzheimer's disease there is an extensive loss of forebrain cholinergic neurons accompanied by a reduction of the cholinergic fiber network of the cortical mantel and hippocampus. The midpontine cholinergic nuclei are spared. The same situation occurs in the corticobasal syndrome and dementia following alcohol abuse and traumatic brain injury. Conversely, in Parkinson's disease, the midpontine nuclei degenerate, together with the dopaminergic nuclei, reducing the cholinergic input to thalamus and forebrain whereas the forebrain cholinergic neurons are spared. In Parkinson's disease with dementia, Lewis Body Dementia and Parkinsonian syndromes both groups of forebrain and midpontine cholinergic nuclei degenerate. In Huntington's disease a dysfunction of the striatal cholinergic interneurons without cell loss takes place. The formation and accumulation of misfolded proteins such as beta-amyloid oligomers and plaques, tau protein tangles and alpha-synuclein clumps, and aggregated mutated huntingtin play a crucial role in the neuronal degeneration by direct cellular toxicity of the misfolded proteins and through the toxic compounds resulting from an extensive inflammatory reaction. Evidences indicate that beta-amyloid disrupts NGF metabolism causing the degeneration of the cholinergic neurons which depend on NGF for their survival, namely the forebrain cholinergic neurons, sparing the midpontine and striatal neurons which express no specific NGF receptors. It is feasible that the latter cholinergic neurons may be damaged by direct toxicity of tau, alpha-synuclein and inflammations products through mechanisms not fully understood. Attention and learning and memory impairment are the functional consequences of the forebrain cholinergic neuron dysfunction, whereas the loss of midpontine cholinergic neurons results primarily in motor and sleep disturbances.