PURPOSE: Reducing the radiation dose to the hippocampus is important to preserve cognitive function in patients with brain tumors. The Vero4DRT system can realize a new irradiation technique, termed volumetric-modulated Dynamic WaveArc therapy (VMDWAT), which allows the safe use of sequential noncoplanar volumetric-modulated beams without couch rotation. Because VMDWAT appears to reduce the hippocampal dose in patients with pituitary adenomas and craniopharyngiomas, we performed a planning study to compare the dose distribution of volumetric-modulated arc therapy using only a coplanar arc (coVMAT) and VMDWAT. METHODS AND MATERIALS: CoVMAT and VMDWAT plans were created for 30 patients with pituitary adenomas and craniopharyngiomas. The prescription dose was 52.2 Gy in 29 fractions, with 99% of each planning target volume covered by 90% of the prescribed dose. Optimization was performed for maximal reduction of the dose to the hippocampus. Treatment time was defined as the beam-on time. RESULTS: The mean equivalent dose in 2 Gy fractions to 40% of the volume of the bilateral hippocampus (EQD40%) for coVMAT/VMDWAT were 9.90/5.31 Gy, respectively (P < .001). The mean EQD40% in VMDWAT was less than 7.3 Gy, which is the threshold for predicting cognitive impairment. Although the volume of normal brain receiving 5 Gy (V5) was significantly larger in VMDWAT, compared with coVMAT, the normal brain volume receiving 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, and 50 Gy (V10-50) was significantly smaller in VMDWAT. The conformity and homogeneity indices were significantly better in VMDWAT. The mean VMDWAT treatment time was longer compared with coVMAT (70.1 vs 67.1 seconds, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Although VMDWAT increased brain V5 and the treatment time compared with coVMAT, it significantly reduced the dose to the hippocampus and brain V10 to V50 and improved target conformity and homogeneity. VMDWAT could be a promising treatment technique for pituitary adenomas and craniopharyngiomas.