Stroke is the second most common cause of death worldwide. A systematic description and characterization of the strokes and the effects induced in the hippocampus have not been performed so far. Here, we analysed the protein expression in the hippocampus 24 h after cerebral ischaemic injury and repair. Drug intervention using Danhong injection (DHI), which has been reported to have good therapeutic effects in a clinical setting, was selected for our study of cerebral ischaemia repair in rat models. A larger proteome dataset and total 4091 unique proteins were confidently identified in three biological replicates by combining tissue extraction for rat hippocampus and LC-MS/MS analysis. A label-free approach was then used to quantify the differences among the four experimental groups (Naive, Sham, middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and MCAO + DHI groups) and showed that about 2500 proteins on average were quantified in each of the experiment group. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that in total 280 unique proteins identified above were differentially expressed (P < 0.05). By combining the subcellular localization, hierarchical clustering and pathway information with the results from injury and repair phase, 12 significant expressed proteins were chosen and verified with respect to their potential as candidates for cerebral ischaemic injury by Western blot. The primary three signalling pathways of the candidates related may be involved in molecular mechanisms related to cerebral ischaemic injury. In addition, a glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (Gsk-3beta) inhibitor of the candidates with the best corresponding expression trends between western blotting (WB) and label-free quantitative results were chosen for further validation. The results of Western blot analysis of protein expression and 2,3,5- chloride three phenyl tetrazole (TTC) staining of rat brains showed that DHI treatment and Gsk-3beta inhibitor are both able to confer protection against ischaemic injury in rat MCAO model. The observations of the present study provide a novel understanding regarding the regulatory mechanism of cerebral ischaemic injury.