The upregulation of miR-16-1 expression and heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) and inflammatory reaction mechanism in astrocytes of mice with epilepsy induced by encephalitis B virus infection were studied. Six-to-eight-week-old healthy male C57BL/6 mice received intraperitoneal injection of pilocarpine (320-340 mg/kg, 40 mg/ml) to induce status epilepsy. After 7 days, mice were inoculated with 100 microl Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) in the neck, including 6.25x23 PFU Japanese encephalitis virus P3 wild strain. The experiment was divided into 4 groups, including, the healthy control group, the epilepsy model group, the model group + negative inoculation group and the virus infection group with 10 mice in each group. The healthy control group received intraperitoneal injection of the same amount of normal saline; the model group + negative inoculation group was injected with the same amount of DMEM without P3. One and three days after infection, 5 mice from each group were sacrificed, hippocampus tissues were obtained and astrocytes were isolated. After purification, glial fibrillary acidic protein was identified by immunohistochemical staining. Infected glial cells were detected by P3 antigen of immunofluorescence staining. RT-PCR method was used to detect the expression of miR-16-1 mRNA in astrocytes. Western blot analysis was used to detect the expression of HSP70. ELISA method was used to detect the levels of interleukin (IL)-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) inflammatory factors in tail vein blood. Level of expression of miR-16-1 mRNA, HSP70 as well as IL-6, TNF-alpha and NF-kappaB inflammatory factor levels of virus infected mice of 1 and 3 days were significantly higher (P<0.05) than those of model group and negative inoculation group and lowest in control group. In conclusion, the level of expression of miR-16-1 and HSP70 can be increased by the infection of Japanese encephalitis virus on the astrocytes of mice with epilepsy, to promote the expression of IL-6, TNF-alpha and NF-kappaB of inflammatory factors.