Pyrethrinoids are synthetic pesticides widely used in agriculture and farms to protect crops from weeds, insects, fungi, and molds. Increased and uncontrolled use of these pollutants can have harmful effects on human health via consumption of contaminated food products. In the present study, deltamethrin (DLT = 3.72 mg/kg) and Bifenthrin (BF = 2.6 mg/kg) were used during a long-term exposition in the rats to assess their effect on mitochondrial integrity and function in different brain areas (hippocampus, striatum, cortex, and cerebellum). The results of this study have shown that chronic treatment of rats by both DLT and BF, on their own or in a mixture, has induced a significant increase in mitochondrial MDA, but when quercetin (Que) was co-administered with pesticides, this enhancement has been prevented in the almost of treated rats compared to solvent and control groups. In hippocampus area, GSH has significantly increased in all treated rats, except for BF and DLT-Que.-treated groups. In striatum, GSH has been depleted in the BF and DLT-treated groups compared to control and solvent groups; in contrast, when Que. was associated with pesticides, the rate of this tripeptide has been maintained at normal levels. In the cortex and cerebellum, GSH has been depleted significantly in all treated animals but has increased in DLT-Que. and mixture-Que.-treated groups in the cerebral cortex, at the same time; it has been maintained at normal levels in BF-Que.-treated groups in the cerebellum compared to control and solvent rats. On the other side, the results of this study have shown a loss of catalase (CAT) and glutathione S-transferase (GST) activities in all brain regions of pesticide-treated rats, but such a fall in enzymatic activities has been prevented by Que. when it was co-administered to rats with pesticides at the dose of 5 mg/kg, except in the cerebellum. In addition, this study has shown mitochondria's swelling in almost all the brain areas with exception of the cerebellum, providing information about a loss of mitochondrial membrane integrity in brain neurons of rats exposed to pyrethrinoids. Furthermore, preventive administration of Que., in association with pesticides (5 mg/kg) or their mixture (10 mg/kg), has prevented mitochondria swelling in almost all of the analyzed brain tissues.