Seizure-provoking factors circulate late in gestation during normal pregnancy, but do not readily gain access to the brain due to the protective nature of the blood-brain barrier. In particular, efflux transporters are powerful ATP-driven pumps that actively prevent unwanted compounds from entering the brain. We hypothesized that acute inhibition of efflux transporters at the blood-brain barrier would result in spontaneous seizures in pregnant rats. We further hypothesized that the blood-brain barrier protects the maternal brain from seizure by increasing expression and/or activity of p-glycoprotein (P-gp), a major efflux transporter. Main blood-brain barrier efflux transporters were inhibited in-vivo in nonpregnant (Nonpreg) and pregnant (Preg; d19) Sprague Dawley rats (n=8/group). Seizures were monitored in conscious animals for 8h via chronically implanted electroencephalography (EEG) electrodes in the hippocampus and motor cortex and time-synced video. P-gp activity was measured via a calcein accumulation assay in freshly isolated cortical and hippocampal capillaries from Preg (d20) and Nonpreg rats (n=8-16/group), to assess regional susceptibility to transporter inhibition. P-gp expression, capillary density, and microglial activation as a measure of neuroinflammation were quantified using immunohistochemistry (n=4-6/group). Efflux transporter inhibition elicited hippocampal seizures within 1h in 100% of Preg rats that was not associated with neuroinflammation or elevated tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) or vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), but negatively correlated with levels of estradiol. Hippocampal seizures were considerably less prevalent in Nonpreg rats. However, behavioral seizures in the motor cortex developed of similar severity in both groups of rats, demonstrating regional heterogeneity in response to efflux transporter inhibition. Basal P-gp activity was similar between groups, however, exposure to serum from Preg rats significantly decreased P-gp activity in the hippocampus, but not cortex, compared to serum from Nonpreg rats (0.29+/-0.1units/s in Preg vs. 0.06+/-0.02units/s in Nonpreg rats; p<0.05) that was not associated with elevated TNFalpha or VEGF. Thus, pregnancy differentially increased the susceptibility of the hippocampus to seizures in response to blood-brain barrier efflux transporter inhibition that may be due to the inhibitory effect of circulating factors in pregnancy on P-gp activity in the hippocampus.