Traditionally, the neurobiology of major depressive disorder (MDD) has been largely considered from the perspective of the state of major depressive episodes (MDE) versus being in remission, but the current accumulation of disease markers, largely acquired cross-sectionally, is strongly suggestive of neuroprogressive aspects of MDD. This chapter focuses on the changes in disease markers involved in the reorganization of the nervous system in MDD, including the translocator protein (TSPO; an index of microglial activation), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; an index of astroglial activation), [11C]harmine (a marker of monoamine oxidase A; MAO-A), and several other indices (metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 [mGluR5], excitatory amino acid transporters, and magnetic resonance imaging spectroscopy measurements) of glutamate dysregulation. These are markers of processes involved in immune activation, oxidative stress, and chronic glucocorticoid exposure. Positron emission tomography studies of the TSPO distribution volume, a marker of microglial activation, provide strong evidence for microglial activation throughout the gray matter of the brain during MDE of MDD. In postmortem studies, GFAP reductions in the orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and hippocampus indicate a deficit in reactive astroglia. Elevated MAO-A levels are present throughout the gray matter of the brain, including affect-modulating brain regions, starting in high-risk states for MDE such as the early postpartum period, perimenopause, heavy cigarette smoking, heavy alcohol intake, and prior to MDE recurrence. Evidence is accumulating for glutamate dysregulation, with some findings of reduced glutamate transporter density in the orbitofrontal cortex, and decreased mGluR5 density. Collectively, these changes suggest an imbalance in the immune system with increased microglial activation and decreased astroglial activation, continued elevations of the MAO-A level, and, likely, the development of extracellular glutamate dysregulation. Many of these imbalances involve processes implicated in increased oxidative stress, apoptosis, and neurodegeneration. Future studies are required to assess potential therapeutics targeting these processes to ameliorate progression of MDD.