High affinity somatostatin receptors have been measured in postmortem brains from 18 neurologically asymptomatic patients (mean age: 67 years) using the stable somatostatin analog 125I-204-090, DPhe-Cys-Tyr-DTrp-Lys-Thr-Cys-Thr(ol), as radioligand. In homogenates from human frontal cortex, high affinity (Kd = 0.52 nM; Bmax = 557 fmol/mg protein) receptors with pharmacological specificity for somatostatin, [D-Trp8]somatostatin and somatostatin-28 were found. The CNS distribution of these receptors was studied by autoradiography. Somatostatin receptors were distributed in varying densities throughout the whole brain. High concentrations are found in all cortical layers, the deeper layers (V-VI) being usually more dense than the superficial layers (I-III). The limbic system is heavily labeled, in particular hippocampus (CA1, dentate gyrus), most of the nuclei of the amygdala, and the habenula. Also parts of the basal ganglia are very rich in somatostatin receptors: the nucleus caudatus as well as the nucleus accumbens are very dense, whereas the globus pallidus is virtually unlabeled. Interestingly, significant amounts of somatostatin receptors are found in the human cerebellum, which is devoid of endogenous somatostatin. Other discrete areas of the CNS are enriched with somatostatin receptors: locus coeruleus, tuberal nuclei of the hypothalamus, claustum, tuberculum olfactorium as well as spinal trigeminal nucleus and substantia gelatinosa of the spinal cord. The substantia innominata is poor in somatostatin receptors. In general there is a good correlation in the distribution of somatostatin receptors in the human and rat brain and there is a reasonable correlation with endogenous somatostatin levels in human brain tissue, particularly in the larger structures. The very high density and the specific localization of somatostatin receptors in strategic key points in the CNS such as cortex, basal ganglia, limbic system and substantia gelatinosa suggests an important role of somatostatin in cognitive, sensory and extrapyramidal motor functions. The significance of somatostatin receptors in the human cerebellum remains to be elucidated.