In the past few years possible mechanisms that link diabetes and depression have been found. One of these mechanisms is the increase in lipid peroxidation and decrease in antioxidant activity in the hippocampal and prefrontal cortices, which are brain areas involved in mood. The goal of the present study was to evaluate the effect of an antidepressant and of an antioxidant on behavior and oxidative activity in brains of diabetic rats. Rats rendered diabetic after a treatment with streptozotocin (STZ) (60mg/kg) were treated with fluoxetine (15mg/kg), melatonin (10mg/kg), or vehicle for 4 weeks. All animals were tested for signs of depression and anxiety using the elevated plus maze (EPM), open field test (OFT) and the forced swim test (FST). Four groups were compared: (1) normoglycemic, (2) hyperglycemic vehicle treated, and hyperglycemic (3) fluoxetine or (4) melatonin treated rats. On the last day of the study, blood samples were obtained to determine the levels of hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c). Also, brain samples were collected to measure the oxidative stress in the hippocampal and prefrontal cortices using the thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) assay. The activity of the antioxidant enzymes catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and glutathione S-transferase (GST) were also measured on the brain samples. The results show that both fluoxetine and melatonin decrease the signs of depression and anxiety in all tests. Concomitantly, the levels of HbA1c were reduced in drug treated rats, and to a greater degree in the fluoxetine group. In the cerebral cortex of diabetic rats, TBARS was increased, while the activity of CAT, GPx and GST were decreased. Fluoxetine and melatonin treatments decreased TBARS in both cortices. In the prefrontal cortex, fluoxetine and melatonin restored the activity of CAT, while only melatonin improved the activity of GPx and GST. In the hippocampus, the activity of GPx alone was restored by melatonin, while fluoxetine had no effect. These results suggest that antidepressants and antioxidants can counter the mood and oxidative disorders associated with diabetes. While these effects could result from a decreased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) remains to be established.