Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is used to detect antibody-specific antigens in tissues; the results depend on the ability of the primary antibodies to bind to their antigens. Therefore, results depend on the quality of preservation of the specimen. Many investigators have overcome the deleterious effects of over-fixation on the binding of primary antibodies to specimen antigens using IHC, but if the specimen is under-fixed or fixation is delayed, false negative results could be obtained despite certified laboratory practices. Microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) is an abundant microtubule-associate protein that participates in the outgrowth of neuronal processes and synaptic plasticity; it is localized primarily in cell bodies and dendrites of neurons. MAP2 immunolabeling has been reported to be absent in areas of the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus of Alzheimer's disease brains that were co-localized with the dense-core type of amyloid plaques. It was hypothesized that the lack of MAP2 immunolabeling in these structures was due to the degradation of the MAP2 antigen by the neuronal proteases that were released as the neurons lysed leading to the formation of these plaques. Because MAP2 is sensitive to proteolysis, we hypothesized that changes in MAP2 immunolabeling may be correlated with the degree of fixation of central nervous system (CNS) tissues. We detected normal MAP2 immunolabeling in fixed rat brain tissues, but MAP2 immunolabeling was decreased or lost in unfixed and delayed-fixed rat brain tissues. By contrast, two ubiquitous CNS-specific markers, myelin basic protein and glial fibrillary acidic protein, were unaffected by the degree of fixation in the same tissues. Our observations suggest that preservation of various CNS-specific antigens differs with the degree of fixation and that the lack of MAP2 immunolabeling in the rat brain may indicate inadequate tissue fixation. We recommend applying MAP2 IHC for all CNS tissues as a pre-screen to assess the quality of the tissue preservation and to avoid potentially false negative IHC results.