ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Banxia-houpu decoction is a famous formula in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) with the powerful anti-depressant activity. AIM OF THE STUDY: This study aimed to investigate the effect of Banxia-houpu decoction on glucose intolerance associated with anhedonia in chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) rats, then to explore its underlying pharmacological mechanisms. MATERIALS AND METHODS: After 6-week CUMS procedure, male Wistar rats were given Banxia-houpu decoction (3.29 and 6.58g/kg, intragastrically) for 6 weeks. Sucrose solution consumption test was employed to evaluate the anhedonia behavior. Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was used to determine glucose tolerance. Serum levels of corticosterone, corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), insulin and interleukin-1 beta (IL-1beta) were measured by commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits, respectively. Furthermore, the key proteins for insulin signaling, as well as nod-like receptor family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, were analyzed by Western blot in periphery liver and brain regions hypothalamus, hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, respectively. RESULTS: Banxia-houpu decoction significantly increased sucrose solution consumption and decreased serum corticosterone and CRF levels in CUMS rats, further demonstrating its antidepressant activity. More importantly, Banxia-houpu decoction improved glucose tolerance in OGTT in this animal model. Furthermore, it protected against CUMS-induced insulin signaling impairment in the liver, as well as hypothalamus and prefrontal cortex in rats. Although without significant effect on serum IL-1beta levels, Banxia-houpu decoction inhibited NLRP3 inflammasome activation in the liver, hypothalamus, hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of CUMS rats, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates that Banxia-houpu decoction suppresses NLRP3 inflammasome activation and improves insulin signaling impairment in both periphery liver and brain regions in CUMS rats, possibly contributing to its anti-depressive effect with glucose tolerance improvement. These results may provide the evidence that Banxia-houpu decoction is a potential antidepressant with the advantage to reduce the risk of comorbid depression with type 2 diabetes mellitus.