Nav1.1 and Nav1.2 are the voltage-gated sodium channel pore-forming alpha I and II subunits, encoded by the genes SCN1A and SCN2A. Although mutations of both genes have similarly been described in patients with epilepsy, autism and/or intellectual disability, their expression sites in brain are largely distinct. Nav1.1 was shown to be expressed dominantly in parvalbumin (PV)-positive or somatostatin (SST)-positive inhibitory neurons and in a sparsely-distributed subpopulation of excitatory neurons. In contrast, Nav1.2 has been reported to be dominantly expressed in excitatory neurons. Here we show that Nav1.2 is also expressed in caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE)-derived inhibitory neurons, and expressions of Nav1.1 and Nav1.2 are mutually-exclusive in many of brain regions including neocortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, striatum and globus pallidus. In neocortex at postnatal day 15, in addition to the expression in excitatory neurons we show that Nav1.2 is expressed in reelin (RLN)-positive/SST-negative inhibitory neurons that are presumably single-bouquet cells because of their cortical layer I-limited distribution, and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)-positive neurons that would be multipolar cell because of their layer I/II margin and layer VI distribution. Although Nav1.2 has previously been reported to be expressed in SST-positive cells, we here show that Nav1.2 is not expressed in either of PV-positive or SST-positive inhibitory neurons. PV-positive and SST-positive inhibitory neurons derive from medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) and innervate excitatory neurons, while VIP-positive and RLN-positive/SST-negative inhibitory neurons derive from CGE, innervate on inhibitory neurons and play disinhibitory roles in the neural network. Our results therefore indicate that, while Nav1.1 is expressed in MEG-derived inhibitory neurons, Nav1.2 is expressed in CGE-derived disinhibitory interneurons in addition to excitatory neurons. These findings should contribute to understanding of the pathology of neurodevelopmental diseases caused by SCN2A mutations.