The present study aimed to investigate the effect of alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (alpha7nAChR) agonist on the damage of hippocampal neurons and the expression of toll like receptor 4 (TLR4)/myeloid differentiation primary response 88 (Myd88)/nuclear factor (NF)kappaB signal pathwayassociated factors in cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). Sprague Dawley rats were randomly divided into five groups: Sham operation (Sham); CPB; CPB + alpha7nAChR agonist PHA568487 (PHA); CPB + alpha7nAChR inhibitor MLA (MLA); and CPB + PHA568487 + TLR4 antagonist (CPT). Blood and brain tissue samples were harvested at 12 h following the withdrawal of CPB. Levels of serum inflammatory factors [interleukin (IL)1beta, IL6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)alpha] and brain injury markers [S100beta and neuronspecific enolase (NSE)] were measured using ELISA. In addition, pathological histology and apoptosis changes were observed using hematoxylin and eosin staining, and Tunnel assays. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot assays were used to determine the expression of TLR4, Myd88 and NFkappaB mRNA, and protein in the hippocampus. The morphology of hippocampal pyramidal cells in the Sham group was observed to be normal. Pyramidal cells in the CPB, MLA and CPT groups were loosely arranged, and the baselines had disappeared, with clear nucleus pyknosis and neuronal apoptosis. Furthermore, the cells in the PHA group were slightly damaged. IL1beta, IL6, TNFalpha, S100beta and NSE expression levels in the CPB, MLA, and CPT groups were significantly higher compared with that in the Sham group (P<0.05). Compared with CPB group, the expression of inflammatory cytokines in the PHA group was significantly lower (P<0.05). The expression of TLR4, Myd88 and NFkappaB mRNA, and protein in the hippocampus of CPB, MLA and CPT groups were significantly higher compared with that in the Sham group, and the PHA group expression was significantly lower compared with the CPB group (P<0.05). alpha7nAChRs agonist can inhibit the apoptosis of rat brain neurons induced by CPB, and may protect against brain injury through the TLR4/Myd88/NFkappaB signaling pathway.