OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the sedative and hypnotic effects of Foshouningshen decoction (FSNSD) and study its effects on expressions of 5-hydroxy tryptamine (5-HT) and 5-HT1A receptor (5-HT1AR) in the hippocampus in a rat model of insomnia. METHODS: Male KM mice were divided into control group, estazolam (0.4 mg/kg daily) group, and low-, moderate-, and high-dose FSNSD groups (daily dose of 12, 24, and 48 g/kg, respectively). After corresponding treatments for 1 week, the mice underwent sleep-inducing test with subthreshold and threshold doses of sodium pentobarbital. Forty-eight male SD rats were randomized into control group, insomnia model group, estazolam group (0.2 mg/kg daily), and low-, moderate-, and high-dose FSNSD groups (with daily dose of 6, 12, and 24 g/kg, respectively). Rat models of insomnia were established by intraperitoneal injection of 4-cholro-dl-phenylalanine (PCPA) at the daily dose of 350 mg/kg for 3 days, after which the rats received corresponding treatments via gavage for 1 week. The performance of the rats in open field test was recorded and the hippocampal expression of 5-HT was detected using ELISA; the expressions of 5-HT1AR protein and mRNA in the hippocampus were detected using immunohistochemistry and real-time PCR, respectively. RESULTS: In the sleep-inducing test with a subthreshold dose of sodium pentobarbital, the mice treated with high-dose FSNSD showed a significantly higher rate of sleep onset than the control mice (P<0.05); in the test with a threshold dose of sodium pentobarbital, treatment with moderate- and high-dose FSNSD resulted in significantly prolonged sleeping time (P<0.01) and shortened sleep latency (P<0.05) in the mice. The rats in insomnia model group showed increased total distance in open field test (P<0.05) with significantly decreased content of 5-HT (P<0.01) and expressions of 5-HT1AR protein and mRNA in the hippocampus (P<0.01). Treatment of the rats with estazolam or high-dose FSNSD obviously decreased the total distance in open field test (P<0.05) and increased the content of 5-HT (P<0.05) and expressions of 5-HT1AR (P<0.01) in the hippocampus of rats with insomnia. CONCLUSION: FSNSD can produce therapeutic effects on insomnia possibly by increasing 5-HT content and expressions of 5-HT1AR in the hippocampus.