INTRODUCTION: Subcortical vascular mild cognitive impairment (svMCI) is the predementia stage of subcortical vascular dementia (SVaD). The aim of this research is to explore and compare cerebral gray matter (GM) volume reduction in svMCI patients and SVaD patients, and to investigate the relationship between cerebral GM volume reduction and cognitive deficits. METHODS: Thirty one svMCI patients, 29 SVaD patients, and 31 healthy controls were recruited in our research. They conducted neuropsychological tests and brain structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination. To detect cerebral GM volume reduction in svMCI patients and SVaD patients, we used statistical parametric mapping 8-voxel-based morphometry 8 (SPM8-VBM8) method to analyze MRI data. To detect the relationship between cerebral GM volume reduction and cognitive deficits, multiple linear regression analysis was used. RESULTS: Compared with healthy controls, svMCI patients showed cerebral GM volume reduction in hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus, insula and superior temporal gyrus. Compared with healthy controls, SVaD patients exhibited more atrophy which encompasses all of these areas plus anterior and middle cingulate, inferior temporal gyrus, orbitofrontal cortex, and superior frontal gyrus. In svMCI patients, cerebral GM volume reduction correlated with memory loss, attention dysfunction, and language dysfunction; in SVaD patients, besides those cognitive deficits, cerebral GM volume reduction correlated with more cognitive impairments, including executive dysfunction, neuropsychiatric symptom, and depression. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings prove that both svMCI patients and SVaD patients exhibit cerebral GM volume reduction and there may exist a hierarchy between svMCI and SVaD, and cerebral GM volume reduction in both svMCI patients and SVaD patients correlates with cognitive deficits, which can help us understand the mechanism of cognitive impairments in svMCI patients and SVaD patients, and diagnose SVaD at its early stage.