LTP has been known to be a mechanism by which experience modifies synaptic responses in the neocortex. Visual deprivation in the form of dark exposure or dark rearing from birth enhances NMDAR-dependent LTP in layer 2/3 of visual cortex, a process often termed metaplasticity, which may involve changes in NMDAR subunit composition and function. However, the effects of reexposure to light after dark rearing from birth on LTP induction have not been explored. Here, we showed that the light exposure after dark rearing revealed a novel NMDAR independent form of LTP in the layer 2/3 pyramidal cells in visual cortex of mice of both sexes, which is dependent on mGluR5 activation and is associated with intracellular Ca(2+) rise, CaMKII activity, PKC activity, and intact protein synthesis. Moreover, the capacity to induce mGluR-dependent LTP is transient: it only occurs when mice of both sexes reared in the dark from birth are exposed to light for 10-12 h, and it does not occur in vision-experienced, male mice, even after prolonged exposure to dark. Thus, the mGluR5-LTP unmasked by short visual experience can only be observed after dark rearing but not after dark exposure. These results suggested that, as in hippocampus, in layer 2/3 of visual cortex, there is coexistence of two distinct activity-dependent systems of synaptic plasticity, NMDAR-LTP, and mGluR5-LTP. The mGluR5-LTP unmasked by short visual experience may play a critical role in the faster establishment of normal receptive field properties.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT LTP has been known to be a mechanism by which experience modifies synaptic responses in the neocortex. Visual deprivation in the form of dark exposure or dark rearing from birth enhances NMDAR-dependent LTP in layer 2/3 of visual cortex, a process often termed metaplasticity. NMDAR-dependent form of LTP in visual cortex has been well characterized. Here, we report that an NMDAR-independent form of LTP can be promoted by novel visual experience on dark-reared mice, characterized as dependent on intracellular Ca(2+) rise, PKC activity, and intact protein synthesis and also requires the activation of mGluR5. These findings suggest that, in layer 2/3 of visual cortex, as in hippocampus, there is coexistence of two distinct activity-dependent systems of synaptic plasticity.