Estrogen deficiency and aging are associated with osteoporosis, impaired bone healing, and lower cognitive performance. Close functional and physical connections occur between bone and the central nervous system. An anti-inflammatory drug, zileuton (which is an inhibitor of arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase), is known to have a positive effect on bone tissue repair and brain ischemia. We studied the effect of zileuton on osteopenic bone and its healing and on the genes considered to be crucial for the cross talks between bone and brain. Three-month-old Sprague-Dawley rats were ovariectomized or left untreated. After 8 wk, bilateral metaphyseal tibia osteotomy with plate osteosynthesis was performed in all rats. Ovariectomized rats were fed with food containing zileuton (1, 10, or 100 mg/kg body wt) for 5 wk. In tibiae, bone volume, callus and cortical volume, and gene expression of osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase were enhanced by zileuton (10 or 100 mg); biomechanical properties and bone density were not changed. In femur, zileuton enlarged cortical volume distal and trabecular volume proximal, decreasing their density. The expression level of brain Sema3a, known to regulate bone mass positively, was downregulated after ovariectomy. In contrast, bone Sema4d, a negative regulator of bone mass, was upregulated in the tibia callus after ovariectomy, whereas zileuton treatment (10 or 100 mg) resulted in reverse effects. Here, we describe for the first time the expression of Rbbp4 mRNA and its increase in tibia after ovariectomy. Zileuton caused downregulation of Rbbp4 in the hippocampus and had an effect on bone healing, changed the expression of genes involved in cross talk between bones and brain, and may be a potent drug for further examination in estrogen deficiency-related dysfunction(s). NEW & NOTEWORTHY Zileuton, a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor, increased bone volume, callus and cortical volume in osteotomized tibia, and trabecular and cortical volume in femur. Although the expression of Sema3a (positively regulating bone mass) in brain was downregulated and Sema4d (negatively regulating bone mass) was upregulated in tibia callus after ovariectomy, zileuton could counteract these effects. Rbbp4 (involved in age-related memory loss) was increased in tibia callus after ovariectomy.