Introduction: The GPR55 receptor has been identified as an atypical cannabinoid receptor and is implicated in various physiological processes. However, its functional role in the central nervous system is not currently understood. The presence of GPR55 receptor in neural regions such as the ventral hippocampus (vHipp), which is critical for cognition, recognition memory, and affective processing, led us to hypothesize that intra-vHipp GPR55 transmission may modulate mesolimbic activity states and related behavioral phenomena. The vHipp is involved in contextual memory and affective regulation through functional interactions with the mesolimbic dopamine system. Materials and Methods: Using a combination of in vivo electrophysiology and behavioral pharmacological assays in rats, we tested whether intra-vHipp activation of GPR55 receptor transmission with the fatty acid amide, palmitoylethanolamide (PEA), a lipid neuromodulator with agonist actions at the GPR55 receptor, may modulate mesolimbic dopaminergic activity states. We further examined the potential effects of intra-vHipp PEA in affective, cognitive and contextual memory tasks. Discussion: We report that intra-vHipp PEA produces a hyper-dopaminergic state in the mesolimbic system characterized by increased firing and bursting activity of ventral tegmental area dopaminergic neuron populations. Furthermore, while PEA-induced activation of GPR55 transmission had no effects on opiate-related reward-related memory formation, we observed strong disruptions in social interaction and recognition memory, spatial location memory, and context-independent associative fear memory formation. Finally, the effects of intra-vHipp PEA were blocked by a selective GPR55 receptor antagonist, CID160 and were dependent upon NMDA receptor transmission, directly in the vHipp. Conclusions: The present results add to a growing body of evidence demonstrating important functional roles for GPR55 signaling in cannabinoid-related neuronal and behavioral phenomena and underscore the potential for GPR55 signaling in the mediation of cannabinoid-related effects independently of the CB1/CB2 receptor systems.