The proper formation of synapses-specialized unitary structures formed between two neurons-is critical to mediating information flow in the brain. Synaptic cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) are thought to participate in the initiation of the synapse formation process. However, in vivo functional analysis demonstrates that most well known synaptic CAMs regulate synaptic maturation and plasticity rather than synapse formation, suggesting that either CAMs work synergistically in the process of forming synapses or more CAMs remain to be found. By screening for unknown CAMs using a co-culture system, we revealed that protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type O (PTPRO) is a potent CAM that induces the formation of artificial synapse clusters in co-cultures of human embryonic kidney 293 cells and hippocampal neurons cultured from newborn mice regardless of gender. PTPRO was enriched in the mouse brain and localized to postsynaptic sites at excitatory synapses. The overexpression of PTPRO in cultured hippocampal neurons increased the number of synapses and the frequency of miniature EPSCs (mEPSCs). The knock-down (KD) of PTPRO expression in cultured neurons by short hairpin RNA (shRNA) reduced the number of synapses and the frequencies of the mEPSCs. The effects of shRNA KD were rescued by expressing either full-length PTPRO or a truncated PTPRO lacking the cytoplasmic domain. Consistent with these results, the N-terminal extracellular domain of PTPRO was required for its synaptogenic activity in the co-culture assay. Our data show that PTPRO is a synaptic CAM that serves as a potent initiator of the formation of excitatory synapses.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT The formation of synapses is critical for the brain to execute its function and synaptic cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) play essential roles in initiating the formation of synapses. By screening for unknown CAMs using a co-culture system, we revealed that protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type O (PTPRO) is a potent CAM that induces the formation of artificial synapse clusters. Using loss-of-function and gain-of-function approaches, we show that PTPRO promotes the formation of excitatory synapses. The N-terminal extracellular domain of PTPRO was required for its synaptogenic activity in cultured hippocampal neurons and the co-culture assay. Together, our data show that PTPRO is a synaptic CAM that serves as a potent initiator of synapse formation.