The effects of the convulsants L-allylglycine and bicuculline on the distribution of gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA), glutamate and aspartate in rat brains were assessed immunocytochemically, using antisera raised against glutaraldehyde-protein conjugates of the respective amino acids. In accord with previous biochemical studies of GABA content, L-allylglycine treatment was followed by a decreased immunoreactivity for GABA in the hippocampus and cerebellum, whereas treatment with bicuculline led to an increased immunoreactivity in the hippocampus, but not in the cerebellum. Different cells and zones were affected differentially. With both convulsants the hippocampus showed the most pronounced changes in the neuropil of the pyramidal and granular cell layers. L-Allylglycine treatment led to a substantial decrease in the concentration of detectable GABA-immunoreactive bouton-like dots in the stratum oriens, radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare and in the deep hilar region, but did not produce statistically significant changes in this parameter in the outer and intermediate zones of the dentate molecular layer. In the cerebellum, the decrease in GABA immunoreactivity after L-allylglycine treatment was less in the basket cell terminals than in other GABA-containing elements. Neither convulsant altered the average staining intensity for aspartate or glutamate in the two regions studied, but L-allylglycine reduced the level of aspartate-like immunoreactivity in hippocampal hilar cells. All the changes described were evident after 20 min of seizure activity and were qualitatively similar after 60 min of seizure (animals paralysed and ventilated). Our results indicate that L-allylglycine or bicuculline given intravenously exerts specific effects on cerebral amino acid metabolism. The nature and magnitude of these effects show inter-regional variations and also differ among cellular compartments within each region. Amino acid immunocytochemistry may prove to be a valuable tool for the investigation of metabolic changes associated with epileptic seizures and should be particularly useful in regions showing heterogeneous changes that would tend to cancel each other in biochemical analyses.