ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The seeds of Ziziphus jujuba var. spinosa (Bunge) Hu ex H.F Chow (Rhamnaceae) and the roots of Codonopsis lanceolata (Siedbold & Zucc.) Benth. & Hook. f ex Trautv. (Campanulaceae), contained in the DHP1402, have long been used for treating dementia or hypomnesia as folk medicine. AIM OF THE STUDY: It has been reported that Z. jujuba var. spinosa and C. lanceolata are effective in improving cognitive function, but via different mechanisms. Therefore, in the present study, we evaluated the synergistic effects of Z. jujuba var. spinosa and C. lanceolata on scopolamine-induced memory impairment. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Scopolamine, a cholinergic muscarinic receptor antagonist, was used to induce cognitive dysfunction. We employed several behavioral tasks to estimate the synergistic effect of the seeds of Z. jujuba var. spinosa and the roots of C. lanceolata. In addition, we introduced the Western blotting, the antagonism passive avoidance task to investigate a synergistic effect of an herbal formulation. RESULTS: Synergistic effects of a combination of Z. jujuba var. spinosa and C. lanceolata at a 5:1 ratio [(w/w), DHP1402] were observed against cognitive dysfunction in the passive avoidance and Y-maze tasks. DHP1402 also ameliorated memory deficits in a dose-dependent manner in these behavioral tasks, as well as in the Morris water maze task. According to the Western blot results, the phosphorylation levels of protein kinase A (PKA), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) in the hippocampus were also increased in a synergistic manner after the administration of DHP1402. In addition, we found that the effects of DHP1402 on cognitive function were mediated by N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor signalling, based on the antagonism studies. Furthermore, we found that DHP1402 has inhibitory activity against acetylcholinesterase (AChE). CONCLUSION: DHP1402 attenuates cholinergic blockade-induced cognitive dysfunction through NMDA receptor modulation, PKA-ERK-CREB pathway activation, and AChE inhibition. Therefore, DHP1402 could be a candidate for alleviating cognitive dysfunction.