GABAergic inhibitory transmission is involved in the acute and chronic effects of ethanol on the brain and behavior. One-dose ethanol exposure induces transient plastic changes in GABAA receptor subunit levels, composition, and regional and subcellular localization. Rapid down-regulation of early responder delta subunit-containing GABAA receptor subtypes mediating ethanol-sensitive tonic inhibitory currents in critical neuronal circuits corresponds to rapid tolerance to ethanol's behavioral responses. Slightly slower, alpha1 subunit-containing GABAA receptor subtypes mediating ethanol-insensitive synaptic inhibition are down-regulated, corresponding to tolerance to additional ethanol behaviors plus cross-tolerance to other GABAergic drugs including benzodiazepines, anesthetics, and neurosteroids, especially sedative-hypnotic effects. Compensatory up-regulation of synaptically localized alpha4 and alpha2 subunit-containing GABAA receptor subtypes, mediating ethanol-sensitive synaptic inhibitory currents follow, but exhibit altered physio-pharmacology, seizure susceptibility, hyperexcitability, anxiety, and tolerance to GABAergic positive allosteric modulators, corresponding to heightened alcohol withdrawal syndrome. All these changes (behavioral, physiological, and biochemical) induced by ethanol administration are transient and return to normal in a few days. After chronic intermittent ethanol (CIE) treatment the same changes are observed but they become persistent after 30 or more doses, lasting for at least 120 days in the rat, and probably for life. We conclude that the ethanol-induced changes in GABAA receptors represent aberrant plasticity contributing critically to ethanol dependence and increased voluntary consumption. We suggest that the craving, drug-seeking, and increased consumption in the rat model are tied to ethanol-induced plastic changes in GABAA receptors, importantly the development of ethanol-sensitive synaptic GABAA receptor-mediating inhibitory currents that participate in maintained positive reward actions of ethanol on critical neuronal circuits. These probably disinhibit nerve endings of inhibitory GABAergic neurons on dopamine reward circuit cells, and limbic system circuits mediating anxiolysis in hippocampus and amygdala. We further suggest that the GABAA receptors contributing to alcohol dependence in the rat and presumably in human alcohol use disorders (AUD) are the ethanol-induced up-regulated subtypes containing alpha4 and most importantly alpha2 subunits. These mediate critical aspects of the positive reinforcement of ethanol in the dependent chronic user while alleviating heightened withdrawal symptoms experienced whenever ethanol is absent. The speculative conclusions based on firm observations are readily testable.