The most recently discovered 3',5'-cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase family is the Phosphodiesterase 11 (PDE11) family, which is encoded by a single gene PDE11A. PDE11A is a dual-specific PDE, breaking down both cAMP and cGMP. There are four PDE11A splice variants (PDE11A1-4) with distinct tissue expression profiles and unique N-terminal regulatory regions, suggesting that each isoform could be individually targeted with a small molecule or biologic. PDE11A4 is the PDE11A isoform expressed in brain and is found in the hippocampal formation of humans and rodents. Studies in rodents show that PDE11A4 mRNA expression in brain is, in fact, restricted to the hippocampal formation (CA1, possibly CA2, subiculum, and the adjacently connected amygdalohippocampal area). Within the hippocampal formation of rodents, PDE11A4 protein is expressed in neurons but not astrocytes, with a distribution across nuclear, cytoplasmic, and membrane compartments. This subcellular localization of PDE11A4 is altered in response to social experience in mouse, and in vitro studies show the compartmentalization of PDE11A4 is controlled, at least in part, by homodimerization and N-terminal phosphorylation. PDE11A4 expression dramatically increases in the hippocampus with age in the rodent hippocampus, from early postnatal life to late aging, suggesting PDE11A4 function may evolve across the lifespan. Interestingly, PDE11A4 protein shows a three to tenfold enrichment in the rodent ventral hippocampal formation (VHIPP; a.k.a. anterior in primates) versus dorsal hippocampal formation (DHIPP). Consistent with this enrichment in VHIPP, studies in knockout mice show that PDE11A regulates the formation of social memories and the stabilization of mood and is a critical mechanism by which social experience feeds back to modify the brain and subsequent social behaviors. PDE11A4 likely controls behavior by regulating hippocampal glutamatergic, oxytocin, and cytokine signaling, as well as protein translation. Given its unique tissue distribution and relatively selective effects on behavior, PDE11A may represent a novel therapeutic target for neuropsychiatric, neurodevelopmental, or age-related disorders. Therapeutically targeting PDE11A4 may be a way to selectively restore aberrant cyclic nucleotide signaling in the hippocampal formation while leaving the rest of the brain and periphery untouched, thus, relieving deficits while avoiding unwanted side effects.