INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Cognitive impairment is a significant comorbidity of temporal lobe epilepsy that is associated with extensive hippocampal cell loss. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the anterior thalamic nucleus (ANT) has been used for the treatment of refractory partial seizures. In the pilocarpine model of epilepsy, ANT DBS applied during status epilepticus (SE) reduces hippocampal inflammation and apoptosis. When given to chronic epileptic animals it reduces hippocampal excitability and seizure frequency. Here, we tested whether ANT DBS delivered during SE and the silent phase of the pilocarpine model would reduce cognitive impairment when animals became chronically epileptic. MATERIALS AND METHODS: SE was induced by a systemic pilocarpine injection (320 mg/kg). Immediately after SE onset, rats were assigned to receive DBS during the first six hours of SE (n = 8; DBSa group) or during SE + the silent period (i.e., 6 h/day until the animals developed the first spontaneous recurrent seizure; n = 10; DBSs group). Four months following SE, animals underwent water maze testing and histological evaluation. Nonstimulated chronic epileptic animals (n = 13; PCTL group) and age-matched naive rats (n = 11, CTL group) were used as controls. Results were analyzed by repeated-measures analyses of variance (RM_ANOVA) and one-way ANOVAs, followed by Newman-Keuls post hoc tests. RESULTS: Although all groups learned the spatial task, epileptic animals with or without DBS spent significantly less time in the platform quadrant, denoting a spatial memory deficit (p < 0.02). Despite these negative behavioral results, we found that animals given DBS had a significantly higher number of cells in the CA1 region and dentate gyrus. Mossy fiber sprouting was similar among all epileptic groups. CONCLUSIONS: Despite lesser hippocampal neuronal loss, ANT DBS delivered either during SE or during SE and the silent phase of the pilocarpine model did not mitigate memory deficits in chronic epileptic rats.