The aim of the present study was to examine cross state-dependent learning between ACPA (a selective cannabinoid CB1 receptor agonist) and muscimol (a selective GABAA receptor agonist) in the step-down inhibitory avoidance learning task. The dorsal hippocampal CA1 regions of adult male NMRI mice were bilaterally cannulated, and all drugs were microinjected into the intended sites of injection. Post-training and/or pre-test administration of ACPA (1 and 2ng/mouse) dose-dependently induced amnesia. Pre-test microinjection of the same doses of ACPA reversed the post-training ACPA-induced amnesia. This event has been named ACPA state-dependent learning (SDL). Post-training and/or pre-test microinjection of muscimol (0.05 and 0.1mug/mouse) dose-dependently induced amnesia. Pre-test administration of the same doses of muscimol reversed the post-training muscimol-induced amnesia, suggesting muscimol SDL. The amnesia induced by post-training administration of ACPA was reversed by pre-test administration of muscimol (0.05 and 0.1mug/mouse). Furthermore, the pre-test microinjection of muscimol (0.025 and 0.05mug/mouse) with an ineffective dose of ACPA (0.5ng/mouse) significantly restored memory retrieval and induced ACPA SDL. In another series of experiments, the amnesia induced by post-training administration of muscimol was reversed by pre-test administration of ACPA (1 and 2ng/mouse). Moreover, pre-test microinjection of ACPA (0.5 and 1ng/mouse) with an ineffective dose of muscimol (0.025mug/mouse) significantly restored memory retrieval and induced muscimol SDL. It is important to note that pre-test intra-CA1 injection of a selective GABAA receptor antagonist, bicuculline (0.125 and 0.25mug/mouse), 5min before the administration of muscimol (0.1mug/mouse) or ACPA (2ng/mouse) dose-dependently inhibited muscimol- and ACPA-induced SDL, respectively. Pre-test intra-CA1 administration of bicuculline (0.0625, 0.125 and 0.25mug/mouse) by itself did not affect memory retention. In conclusion, the data strongly revealed a cross SDL among ACPA and muscimol in the dorsal hippocampal CA1 regions.