Cannabinoids (CB), transient receptors potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1) and nitric oxide (NO) were found to be interlinked in regulating some neuronal functions such as membrane excitability and synaptic transmission. TRPV1 play a fundamental role since it represents a synaptic target for CB that triggers several downstream cellular pathways. In this regard, recent evidence report that TRPV1 could influence NO production by modulating neuronal NO synthase (nNOS) activity. In the present research, we pointed to manipulate nNOS function to assess its role on TRPV1 signalling in hyperexcitability conditions elicited in the dentate gyrus of hippocampal formation. The activation of TRPV1 receptors is achieved by administering capsaicin (CAP), the main TRPV1 agonist exerting a widely reported proepileptic effects. In order to focus on nNOS activity, we used 7-nitroindazole (7NI), nNOS inhibitor, or L-Arginine (ARG), NO precursor, before CAP. Then, the effects of each of these co-administration protocols were tested in presence of WIN 55,212, a CB agonist. The study was conducted in rats using an electrically-induced acute model of temporal lobe hyperexcitability, the Maximal Dentate Activation (MDA), considering different indicators of paroxysmal activity such as: percentage of responses to electrical stimulation, MDA discharge parameters and threshold current intensity for MDA. Data showed that the excitatory effects of CAP were reduced by 7NI and enhanced by ARG pretreatments, respectively. In addition, the co-treatment with WIN counteracted CAP effect, substantially resulting in an inhibitory effect. Finally, the CAP-WIN functional interaction appeared to be modulated by interfering with NO signalling since 7NI increased the inhibitory effect induced by the co-treatment with CAP and WIN, whereas ARG reduced it. These findings suggest that nNOS function could be involved in the CB/TRPV1 signalling and shed light on a new putative cannabinoid-related control of neuronal hyperexcitability in the hippocampus.