Exposure to stressors primes the neuroinflammatory and microglial proinflammatory response to subsequent immune challenges, suggesting that stress might attenuate immunoregulatory mechanisms in the CNS microenvironment. CD200:CD200R is a key immunoregulatory signaling dyad that constrains microglial activation, and disruption of CD200:CD200R signaling primes microglia to subsequent immune challenges. Therefore, the present study examined the mediating role of CD200:CD200R signaling in stress-induced microglial priming. Here, we found that exposure to an acute stressor reduced CD200R expression across sub-regions of the hippocampus, amygdala as well as in isolated hippocampal microglia. A transcriptional suppressor of CD200R, CAAT/Enhancer Binding Proteinbeta, was induced by stress and inversely associated with CD200R expression. To examine whether disrupted CD200:CD200R signaling plays a mediating role in stress-induced microglial priming, a soluble fragment of CD200 (mCD200Fc) was administered intra-cisterna magna prior to stressor exposure and stress-induced microglia priming assessed ex vivo 24h later. Treatment with mCD200Fc blocked the stress-induced priming of the microglial pro-inflammatory response. Further, treatment with mCD200R1Fc recapitulated the effects of stress on microglial priming. We previously found that stress increases the alarmin high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1) in hippocampus, and that HMGB1 mediates stress-induced priming of microglia. Thus, we examined whether stress-induced increases in hippocampal HMGB1 are a consequence of disrupted CD200:CD200R signaling. Indeed, treatment with mCD200Fc prior to stress exposure blocked the stress-induced increase in hippocampal HMGB1. The present study suggests that stress exposure disrupts immunoregulatory mechanisms in the brain, which typically constrain the immune response of CNS innate immune cells. This attenuation of immunoregulatory mechanisms may thus permit a primed activation state of microglia to manifest.