Functional synapse formation is critical for the wiring of neural circuits in the developing brain. The cell adhesion molecule N-cadherin plays important roles in target recognition and synaptogenesis. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate the localization of N-cadherin and the subsequent effects remain poorly understood. Here, we show that protein kinase D1 (PKD1) directly binds to N-cadherin at amino acid residues 836-871 and phosphorylates it at Ser 869, 871, and 872, thereby increasing the surface localization of N-cadherin and promoting functional synapse formation in primary cultured hippocampal neurons obtained from embryonic day 18 rat embryos of either sex. Intriguingly, neuronal activity enhances the interactions between N-cadherin and PKD1, which are critical for the activity-dependent growth of dendritic spines. Accordingly, either disruption the binding between N-cadherin and PKD1 or preventing the phosphorylation of N-cadherin by PKD1 in the hippocampal CA1 region of male rat leads to the reduction in synapse number and impairment of LTP. Together, this study demonstrates a novel mechanism of PKD1 regulating the surface localization of N-cadherin and suggests that the PKD1-N-cadherin interaction is critical for synapse formation and function.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Defects in synapse formation and function lead to various neurological diseases, although the mechanisms underlying the regulation of synapse development are far from clear. Our results suggest that protein kinase D1 (PKD1) functions upstream of N-cadherin, a classical synaptic adhesion molecule, to promote functional synapse formation. Notably, we identified a crucial binding fragment to PKD1 at C terminus of N-cadherin, and this fragment also contains PKD1 phosphorylation sites. Through this interaction, PKD1 enhances the stability of N-cadherin on cell membrane and promotes synapse morphogenesis and synaptic plasticity in an activity-dependent manner. Our study reveals the role of PKD1 and the potential downstream mechanism in synapse development, and contributes to the research for neurodevelopment and the therapy for neurological diseases.