Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a neuropsychiatric disorder that is linked to social behavioral deficits and other negative symptoms associated with hippocampal synaptic dysfunction. Synaptic mechanism of schizophrenia is characterized by loss of hippocampal N-Methyl-d-Aspartate Receptor (NMDAR) activity (NMDAR hypofunction) and dendritic spines. Previous studies show that genetic deletion of hippocampal synaptic regulatory calcium-calmodulin dependent kinase II alpha (CaMKIIalpha) cause synaptic and behavioral defects associated with schizophrenia in mice. Although CaMKIIalpha is involved in modulation of NMDAR activity, it is equally linked to inflammatory and neurotropin signaling in neurons. Based on these propositions, we speculate that non-neurotransmitter upstream receptors associated with neurotropic and inflammatory signaling activities of CaMKIIalpha may alter its synaptic function. Besides, how these receptors (i.e. inflammatory and neurotropic receptors) alter CaMKIIalpha function (phosphorylation) relative to hippocampal NMDAR activity in schizophrenia is poorly understood. Here, we examined the relationship between toll-like receptor (TLR4; inflammatory), insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 (IGF-1R; neurotropic) and CaMKIIalpha expression in the hippocampus of behaviorally deficient schizophrenic mice after we induced schizophrenia through NMDAR inhibition. Schizophrenia was induced in WT (C57BL/6) mice through intraperitoneal administration of 30mg/Kg ketamine (NMDAR antagonist) for 5days (WT/SCZ). Five days after the last ketamine treatment, wild type schizophrenic mice show deficiencies in sociability and social novelty behavior. Furthermore, there was a significant decrease in hippocampal CaMKIIalpha (p<0.001) and IGF-1R (p<0.001) expression when assessed through immunoblotting and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. Additionally, WT schizophrenic mice show an increased percentage of phosphorylated CaMKIIalpha in addition to upregulated TLR4 signaling (TLR4, NF-kappaB, and MAPK/ErK) in the hippocampus. To ascertain the functional link between TLR4, IGF-1R and CaMKIIalpha relative to NMDAR hypofunction in schizophrenia, we created hippocampal-specific TLR4 knockdown mouse using AAV-driven Cre-lox technique (TLR4 KD). Subsequently, we inhibited NMDAR function in TLR4 KD mice in an attempt to induce schizophrenia (TLR4 KD SCZ). Interestingly, IGF-1R and CaMKIIalpha expressions were preserved in the TLR4 KD hippocampus after attenuation of NMDAR function. Furthermore, TLR4 KD SCZ mice showed no prominent defects in sociability and social novelty behavior when compared with the control (WT). Our results show that a sustained IGF-1R expression may preserve the synaptic activity of CaMKIIalpha while TLR4 signaling ablates hippocampal CaMKIIalpha expression in NMDAR hypofunction schizophrenia. Together, we infer that IGF-1R depletion and increased TLR4 signaling are non-neurotransmitter pro-schizophrenic cues that can reduce synaptic CaMKIIalpha activity in a pharmacologic mouse model of schizophrenia.