BACKGROUND: Sleep deprivation (SD) leads to cognitive impairment. Neuroinflammation could be a significant contributing factor in the same. An increase in regional brain pro-inflammatory cytokines induces cognitive deficits, however, the magnitude of the effect under SD is not apparent. It is plausible that microglia activation could be involved in the SD-induced cognitive impairment by modulation of neuronal cell proliferation, differentiation, and brain-derived neuronal factor (BDNF) level. The present study aimed to evaluate the possible beneficial effect of minocycline in amelioration of spatial memory decline during SD by its anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective actions. We scrutinized the effect of minocycline on the inflammatory cytokine levels associated with glial cells (microglia and astrocytes) activity and neurogenesis markers crucial for behavioral functions during SD. METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 230-250 g were sleep deprived for 48 h using automated cage shaking apparatus. The spatial memory was tested using MWM apparatus immediately after completion of SD with and without minocycline. The animals were euthanized, blood was collected, and brain was extracted for neuroinflammation and neurogenesis studies. The set of experiments were also conducted with use of temozolomide, a neurogenesis blocker. RESULTS: Minocycline treatment increased the body weight, food intake, and spatial memory performance which declined during SD. It reduced the pro-inflammatory and increased the anti-inflammatory cytokine levels in hippocampus and plasma and inhibited the reactive gliosis in the hippocampus evidenced by improved cell count, morphology, and immunoreactivity. Additionally, minocycline administration promoted neurogenesis at different stages: proliferation (BrdU, Ki-67), differentiation (DCX) cells and growth factor (BDNF). However, no significant change was observed in maturation (NeuN) during SD. In addition, molecules related to behavior, inflammation, and neurogenesis were shown to be more affected after temozolomide administration during SD, and changes were restored with minocycline treatment. We observed a significant correlation of neurogenesis with microglial activation, cytokine levels, and spatial memory during SD. CONCLUSION: The present study demonstrated that the SD-induced decline in spatial memory, neuronal cells proliferation, differentiation, and BDNF level could be attributed to upregulation of neuroinflammatory molecules, and minocycline may be an effective intervention to counteract these changes. Microglial activation is involved in SD-induced changes in inflammatory molecules, neurogenesis, and spatial memory.