Persistent inflammation, mediated in part by increases in cytokines, is a hallmark of traumatlc brain injury (TBI). Minocycline has been shown to inhibit post-TBI neuroinflammation in male rats and mice, but has not been tested in females. Here, we studied sex differences in thermal, stress, and inflammatory responses to TBI and minocycline. Female rats were ovariectomized under isoflurane anesthesia at 33-36 days of age. At 45-55 days of age, male and female rats were implanted intraperitoneally (i.p.) with calibrated transmitters for monitoring body temperature. Moderate cortical contusion injury (CCI) or sham surgery was performed when the rats attained 60-70 days of age. One hour after surgery, rats were injected i.p. with minocycline (50 mg/kg) or saline (0.3 mL); injections were repeated once daily for the next 3 days. At 28 days after CCI or sham surgery, 30 min restraint stress was initiated and blood samples were obtained by tail venipuncture before the onset of restraint and at 30, 60, and 90 min after stress onset. At 35 days after CCI or sham surgery, rats were decapitated and blood was collected for corticosterone (CORT) and cytokine analysis. The brains were removed and ipsilateral cortical tissue and hippocampus were dissected and subsequently assayed for interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha. Hyperthermia occurred during days 1-6 post-CCI in male rats, but only on the day of CCI in female rats, and minocycline prevented its occurrence in both sexes. Minocycline facilitated suppression of the CORT response to restraint stress in both sexes. In females, but not males, hippocampal IL-6 content increased post-CCI compared with sham-injured controls, whereas IL-1beta content was augmented by minocycline. Hippocampal TNF-alpha was unaffected by CCI and minocycline. These results demonstrate sex differences in immediate thermal and long-lasting stress and cytokine responses to CCI, and only short-term protective effects of minocycline on hyperthermia.