Preclinical and clinical evidence suggests pro-inflammatory cytokines might play an important role in the neurobiology of schizophrenia and stress-related psychiatric disorders. Interleukin-18 (IL-18) is a member of the IL-1 family of cytokines and it is widely expressed in brain regions involved in emotional regulation. Since IL-18 involvement in the neurobiology of mental illnesses, including schizophrenia, remains unknown, this work aimed at investigating the behavior of IL-18 null mice (KO) in different preclinical models: 1. the prepulse inhibition test (PPI), which provides an operational measure of sensorimotor gating and schizophrenic-like phenotypes; 2. amphetamine-induced hyperlocomotion, a model predictive of antipsychotic activity; 3. resident-intruder test, a model predictive of aggressive behavior. Furthermore, the animals were submitted to models used to assess depressive- and anxiety-like behavior. IL-18KO mice showed impaired baseline PPI response, which was attenuated by d-amphetamine at a dose that did not modify PPI response in wild-type (WT) mice, suggesting a hypodopaminergic prefrontal cortex function in those mice. d-Amphetamine, however, induced hyperlocomotion in IL-18KO mice compared to their WT counterparts, suggesting hyperdopaminergic activity in the midbrain. Moreover, IL-18KO mice presented increased basal levels of IL-1beta levels in the hippocampus and TNF-alpha in the prefrontal cortex, suggesting an overcompensation of IL-18 absence by increased levels of other proinflammatory cytokines. Although no alteration was observed in the forced swimming or in the elevated plus maze tests in naive IL-18KO mice, these mice presented anxiogenic-like behavior after exposure to repeated forced swimming stress. In conclusion, deletion of the IL-18 gene resembled features similar to symptoms observed in schizophrenia (positive and cognitive symptoms, aggressive behavior), in addition to increased susceptibility to stress. The IL-18KO model, therefore, could provide new insights into how changes in brain immunological homeostasis induce behavioral changes related to psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia.