Histone acetylation and deacetylation are among the most important epigenetic processes that regulate gene expression. Nonselective inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDAC) can protect brain cells during ischemia and stroke. However, which HDAC isoform is involved in this effect is unknown. Some isoforms of histone deacetylases (HDACs) protect brain cells after ischemia, whereas others can promote their death. Most studies consider early periods (1-24 h) after stroke, whereas little is known on the involvement of HDACs during recovery after stroke. In this study, cellular and intracellular rearrangement of class I HDACs (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC8) was investigated at late periods after photothrombotic infarction (PTI) of the mouse sensorimotor cortex in intact tissue that surrounds the ischemia core, in the corresponding region of the contralateral hemisphere, and in the hippocampus. Each HDAC isoform had a specific pattern of expression and intracellular distribution in neurons and astrocytes at different periods after the ischemia. We did not observe ischemia-induced changes in the subcellular localization of HDACs under study. Three days after the PTI, the expression of HDAC2 was increased in neurons of the damaged hemisphere. The activity of HDAC2 and HDAC8 was elevated 7 days after the ischemia both in neurons and astrocytes of the studied brain structures; the activity of HDAC8 was also increased 14 days after the ischemia. It is notable that the expression of class I HDACs in the intact hemisphere changes in the same way as their expression in the living tissue of the damaged hemisphere. HDAC1 was found both in the nuclei and cytoplasm of the brain cells; HDAC2 was predominantly localized in the nuclei, and HDAC8 was predominantly observed in the cytoplasm. This in addition to the regulation of gene transcription indicates nontranscriptional activity of HDAC1 and HDAC8 during recovery of the brain tissue after the ischemia. HDAC2 and HDAC8 were identified as potential mediators in an early recovery period after stroke, suggesting that selective inhibitors and activators of HDACs can be considered for therapeutic approaches in this period.