PURPOSE: This study aimed to examine the effects of swimming exercise pretreatment on a streptozotocin (STZ)-induced sporadic Alzheimer's disease rat model and provide an initial understanding of related molecular mechanisms. METHODS: Male 2.5-month-old Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into the following 4 groups: a) control, b) swim + vehicle, c) STZ without swim, and d) swim + STZ. The Barnes Maze task and Novel Object Recognition test were used to measure hippocampus-dependent spatial learning and working memory, respectively. Immunofluorescence staining, Western blot analysis, ELISA analysis and related assay kits were used to assess synaptic proteins, inflammatory cytokines, total antioxidant capacity, antioxidant enzymes, amyloid-beta (Abeta) production and tau hyperphosphorylation. RESULTS: Behavioral tests revealed that exercise pretreatment could significantly inhibit STZ-induced cognitive dysfunction (p < 0.05). STZ animals displayed significant loss of pre/post-synaptic markers in the hippocampal CA1 that was reversed by exercise pretreatment (p < 0.05). STZ rats also displayed increased reactive gliosis, release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and oxidative damage, effects attenuated by pre-exercise (p < 0.05 between-treatment changes). Likewise, pre-exercise significantly induced protein expression (p < 0.001) and DNA-binding activity (p = 0.015) of Nrf2 and downstream antioxidant gene expression in the hippocampal CA1 region (p < 0.05). STZ rats had increased levels of Abeta (1-42) and tau hyperphosphorylation that were significantly ameliorated by exercise (p < 0.05). Histological studies showed exercise imparted substantial neuroprotection (p < 0.001), suppressing neuronal apoptosis-like cell death in the hippocampal CA1 compared to STZ control group (p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: Exercise pre-training exerts multifactorial benefits on AD that support its use as a promising new therapeutic option for prevention of neurodegeneration in the elderly and/or AD population.