Despite decades of research, the fundamental neurochemical and molecular mechanisms underlying the major depressive disorder (MDD) are still poorly understood, and current antidepressant treatments have limited clinical efficacy. In clinical conditions, the rapprochement between the disease and the corrective actions of drugs in laboratory animals is essential for developing effective therapies. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate the antidepressant effects of ketamine (N-metil-d-asparte (NMDA) receptor antagonist), minocycline (tetracycline antibiotic), and amitriptyline (classical antidepressant), on behavior and oxidative stress parameters in animals submitted to the chronic mild stress (CMS) and maternal deprivation protocols. For this aim, male Wistar rats were submitted to maternal deprivation or CMS. To induce maternal deprivation, Wistar rats were deprived of maternal care during the first 10days of life. To induce CMS, Wistar rats were submitted to the CMS for 40days. To reverse the effects of stress, treatment was done intraperitoneally with a single dose of ketamine (15mg/kg), and minocycline (25mg/kg) and amitriptyline (10mg/kg) by 20days. After treatment, the animals were submitted to the forced swimming test and then analyzed oxidative stress parameters in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), hippocampus, amygdala and nucleus accumbens (NAc). Treatment with ketamine, minocycline and amitriptyline were able to exert antidepressant effects in the forced swimming test. However, these antidepressant effects were dependent on the stress model by which the animals were exposed. In certain brain regions some treatment strategies had a pro-oxidant effect. Though, most of the strategies used in this study had antioxidant effects, as reported by a decrease on protein and lipid damage, nitrite/nitrate concentration and myeloperoxidase activity. In addition, an increase in the antioxidant superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) enzymes activities were also evident after treatments. In conclusion, the antidepressant effects of ketamine and minocycline, in the present study, may be associated, at least in part, with its antioxidant and neuroprotective effects in animals subjected to maternal deprivation or CMS.