Two neuronal calcium-binding proteins, calbindin-D28k (CaBP) and parvalbumin (PV), were localized in the normal rat hippocampus by using immunocytochemical methods to determine 1) their location and 2) whether a correlation exists between the presence of these two calcium-binding proteins and the selective vulnerability of different hippocampal neuronal populations to experimental seizure activity. CaBP-like immunoreactivity (CaBP-LI) is present in all dentate granule cells and some, but not all, CA1 and CA2 pyramidal cells. Some CA1 pyramidal cells lack CaBP-LI, and those that do are lightly stained compared to the dentate granule cells. CA3 pyramidal cells appear to contain neither CaBP- nor PV-LI, and no granule or pyramidal cells exhibit PV-LI. CaBP-LI is present in distinct populations of dentate and hippocampal interneurons but absent from others. In area dentata, CaBP-LI is present in a small number of interneurons of the molecular and granule cell layers and in a small population of presumed basket cells in or below the granule cell layer. Conversely, more presumed dentate basket cells exhibit PV-LI than CaBP-LI. In the hilus of area dentata, few cells are CaBP- or PV-immunoreactive. The hilar somatostatin/neuropeptide Y (NPY)-immunoreactive cells and hilar mossy cells, two distinct and large populations, lack CaBP- and PV-LI. In the CA3 region, CaBP-LI is present in a relatively small number of interneurons in each stratum. PV-immunoreactive interneurons in area CA3 are more numerous. In area CA1, CaBP-LI is present in many interneurons in strata radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare. Some, but relatively fewer, CaBP-positive interneurons are present in strata pyramidale and oriens. Conversely, PV-immunoreactive interneurons are numerous in strata pyramidale and oriens but rare in strata radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare. Staining with the particulate chromagen benzidine hydrochloride revealed a previously undescribed dense band of CaBP-LI in the inner dentate molecular layer, a lamina enriched with kainate-displaceable glutamate-binding sites and innervated by the apparently excitatory ipsilateral associational/commissural (IAC) pathway that originates in the CaBP-negative hilar mossy cells. Bilateral electrical stimulation of the perforant path was performed in order to destroy the hilar mossy cells and to determine if this band of CaBP-LI is normally present within the mossy cell terminals. Perforant path stimulation that destroyed hilar mossy cells throughout the dorsal portions of both hippocampi did not abolish the dense CaBP-like immunoreactivity in the inner molecular layer.