BACKGROUND: Drug addiction is a chronic brain disorder characterized by the compulsive use of drugs. The study of chronic morphine-induced adaptation in the brain and its functional significance is of importance to understand the mechanism of morphine addiction. Previous studies have found a number of chronic morphine-induced adaptive changes at molecular levels in the brain. A study from our lab showed that chronic morphine-induced increases in the expression of D1 receptors at presynaptic terminals coming from other structures to the basolateral amygdala (BLA) played an important role in environmental cue-induced retrieval of morphine withdrawal memory. However, the neurocircuitry where the increased D1 receptors are located and how chronic morphine increases D1 receptor expression in specific neurocircuits remain to be elucidated. RESULTS: Our results show that chronic morphine induces a persistent increase in D1 receptor expression in glutamatergic terminals of projection neurons from the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) to the BLA, but has no influence on D1 receptor expression in projection neurons from the hippocampus or the thalamus to the BLA. This adaptation to chronic morphine is mediated by reduced expression of miR-105 in the mPFC, which results in enhanced D1 receptor expression in glutamatergic terminals of projection neurons from the mPFC to the BLA. Ex vivo optogenetic experiments show that a chronic morphine-induced increase in D1 receptor expression in glutamatergic terminals of projection neurons from the mPFC to the BLA results in sensitization of the effect of D1 receptor agonist on presynaptic glutamate release. mPFC to BLA projection neurons are activated by withdrawal-associated environmental cues in morphine-withdrawal rats, and overexpression of miR-105 in the mPFC leads to reduced D1 receptor induction in response to chronic morphine in glutamatergic terminals of the projection neurons from the mPFC to the BLA, and a reduction in place aversion conditioned by morphine withdrawal. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that chronic morphine use induces a persistent increase in D1 receptors in glutamatergic terminals of projection neurons from the mPFC to the BLA via downregulation of miR-105 in the mPFC, and that these adaptive changes contribute to environmental cue-induced retrieval of morphine withdrawal memory.