Abstinence from methamphetamine addiction enhances proliferation and differentiation of neural progenitors and increases adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus (DG). We hypothesized that neurogenesis during abstinence contributes to context-driven drug-seeking behaviors. To test this hypothesis, the pharmacogenetic rat model (GFAP-TK rats) was used to conditionally and specifically ablate neurogenesis in the DG. Male GFAP-TK rats were trained to self-administer methamphetamine or sucrose and were administered the antiviral drug valganciclovir (Valcyte) to produce apoptosis of actively dividing GFAP type 1 stem-like cells to inhibit neurogenesis during abstinence. Hippocampus tissue was stained for Ki-67, NeuroD, and DCX to measure levels of neural progenitors and immature neurons, and was stained for synaptoporin to determine alterations in mossy fiber tracts. DG-enriched tissue punches were probed for CaMKII to measure alterations in plasticity-related proteins. Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were performed in acute brain slices from methamphetamine naive (controls) and methamphetamine experienced animals (+/-Valcyte). Spontaneous EPSCs and intrinsic excitability were recorded from granule cell neurons (GCNs). Reinstatement of methamphetamine seeking enhanced autophosphorylation of CaMKII, reduced mossy fiber density, and induced hyperexcitability of GCNs. Inhibition of neurogenesis during abstinence prevented context-driven methamphetamine seeking, and these effects correlated with reduced autophosphorylation of CaMKII, increased mossy fiber density, and reduced the excitability of GCNs. Context-driven sucrose seeking was unaffected. Together, the loss-of-neurogenesis data demonstrate that neurogenesis during abstinence assists with methamphetamine context-driven memory in rats, and that neurogenesis during abstinence is essential for the expression of synaptic proteins and plasticity promoting context-driven drug memory.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Our work uncovers a mechanistic relationship between neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus and drug seeking. We report that the suppression of excessive neurogenesis during abstinence from methamphetamine addiction by a confirmed phamacogenetic approach blocked context-driven methamphetamine reinstatement and prevented maladaptive changes in expression and activation of synaptic proteins and basal synaptic function associated with learning and memory in the dentate gyrus. Our study is the first to demonstrate an interesting and dysfunctional role of adult hippocampal neurogenesis during abstinence to drug-seeking behavior in animals self-administering escalating amounts of methamphetamine. Together, these results support a direct role for the importance of adult neurogenesis during abstinence in compulsive-like drug reinstatement.