Inflammation serves an important role in the progression of osteoarthritis (OA), and IL1beta may act as a catabolic factor on cartilage, reducing the synthesis of primary cartilage components type II collagen and aggrecan. Aquaporin 1 (AQP1) is a 28kDa water channel formed of six transmembrane domains on the cell membrane. AQP1 is highly expressed in the anus, gallbladder and liver, and is moderately expressed in the hippocampus, ependymal cells of the central nervous system and articular cartilage. It was hypothesized that AQP1 may be highly expressed in OA cartilage and that it may increase the expression of catabolic factors during inflammatory OA progression. Therefore, the present study evaluated AQP1 functions in human OA articular chondrocytes. Primary chondrocytes were isolated from human hip and knee cartilage tissues, cultured and transfected with AQP1specific small interfering RNA with or without subsequent IL1beta treatment. In vitro explant culture from hip cartilages were also prepared. Reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (RTPCR) was performed to assess the expression of AQP genes in human articular cartilage, AQP1 immunohistochemistry of the cartilages and explant culture, as well as RTquantitative PCR, western blotting and immunocytochemistry/immunofluorescence of OA chondrocytes to evaluate the expression of AQP1, and catabolic and anabolic factors. RTPCR results demonstrated that AQP0, 1, 3, 7, 9, and 11 were expressed in OA chondrocytes. Immunohistochemistry revealed that AQP1 was highly expressed in the superficial to middle zones of OA articular cartilages. Additionally, AQP1 mRNA was significantly higher in OA cartilage and IL1beta treatment significantly increased AQP1 expression in hip explant cartilage. Furthermore, AQP1 downregulation decreased a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS)4 expression in OA chondrocytes, though it did not affect other associated genes. Immunofluorescence showed that AQP1 and ADAMTS4 were colocalized. These findings indicated that AQP1 depletion may decrease ADAMTS4 expression in human OA chondrocytes. Therefore, regulating AQP1 expression may be a strategy to suppress catabolic factors during OA progression.