BACKGROUND: Topographical disorientation is frequent among patients after a stroke and can be well explored with virtual environments (VEs). VEs also allow for the addition of stimuli. A previous study did not find any effect of non-contextual auditory stimuli on navigational performance in the virtual action planning-supermarket (VAP-S) simulating a medium-sized 3D supermarket. However, the perceptual or cognitive load of the sounds used was not high. OBJECTIVE: We investigated how non-contextual auditory stimuli with high load affect navigational performance in the VAP-S for patients who have had a stroke and any correlation between this performance and dysexecutive disorders. METHODS: Four kinds of stimuli were considered: sounds from living beings, sounds from supermarket objects, beeping sounds and names of other products that were not available in the VAP-S. The condition without auditory stimuli was the control. The Groupe de reflexion pour l'evaluation des fonctions executives (GREFEX) battery was used to evaluate executive functions of patients. RESULTS: The study included 40 patients who have had a stroke (n=22 right-hemisphere and n=18 left-hemisphere stroke). Patients' navigational performance was decreased under the 4 conditions with non-contextual auditory stimuli (P<0.05), especially for those with dysexecutive disorders. For the 5 conditions, the lower the performance, the more GREFEX tests were failed. Patients felt significantly disadvantaged by the non-contextual sounds sounds from living beings, sounds from supermarket objects and names of other products as compared with beeping sounds (P<0.01). Patients' verbal recall of the collected objects was significantly lower under the condition with names of other products (P<0.001). Left and right brain-damaged patients did not differ in navigational performance in the VAP-S under the 5 auditory conditions. CONCLUSIONS: These non-contextual auditory stimuli could be used in neurorehabilitation paradigms to train patients with dysexecutive disorders to inhibit disruptive stimuli.