Information about epileptogenesis-associated changes in protein expression patterns is of particular interest for future selection of target and biomarker candidates. Bioinformatic analysis of proteomic data sets can increase our knowledge about molecular alterations characterizing the different phases of epilepsy development following an initial epileptogenic insult. Here, we report findings from a focused analysis of proteomic data obtained for the hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex samples collected during the early post-insult phase, latency phase, and chronic phase of a rat model of epileptogenesis. The study focused on proteins functionally associated with cell stress, cell death, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, cell-ECM interaction, cell-cell interaction, angiogenesis, and blood-brain barrier function. The analysis revealed prominent pathway enrichment providing information about the complex expression alterations of the respective protein groups. In the hippocampus, the number of differentially expressed proteins declined over time during the course of epileptogenesis. In contrast, a peak in the regulation of proteins linked with cell stress and death as well as ECM and cell-cell interaction became evident at later phases during epileptogenesis in the parahippocampal cortex. The data sets provide valuable information about the time course of protein expression patterns during epileptogenesis for a series of proteins. Moreover, the findings provide comprehensive novel information about expression alterations of proteins that have not been discussed yet in the context of epileptogenesis. These for instance include different members of the lamin protein family as well as the fermitin family member 2 (FERMT2). Induction of FERMT2 and other selected proteins, CD18 (ITGB2), CD44 and Nucleolin were confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Taken together, focused bioinformatic analysis of the proteomic data sets completes our knowledge about molecular alterations linked with cell death and cellular plasticity during epileptogenesis. The analysis provided can guide future selection of target and biomarker candidates.