The regional distribution of D1 dopamine (DA) receptors in the rat brain has been studied by quantitative autoradiography using the specific D1 antagonist [3H]SCH 23390 as a ligand. The binding of [3H]SCH 23390 to striatal sections was saturable, stereospecific, reversible and of high affinity (Kd = 2.05 nM); it occurred at a single population of sites and possessed the pharmacological features of the D1 DA receptor. The highest densities of [3H]SCH 23390 binding sites were found in the caudate-putamen, olfactory tubercle, nucleus accumbens and substantia nigra (especially in the pars compacta). High densities were also observed in the nucleus interstitialis striae terminalis, the anterior olfactory nucleus, the entopeduncular nucleus, the subthalamic nucleus, the claustrum and the amygdalohippocampal area. An intermediate labelling was found in the anteromedial and suprarhinal DA terminal fields of the cerebral cortex, the basolateral, medial and lateral amygdaloid nuclei, the endopiriform nucleus, the primary olfactory cortex, the globus pallidus, the superior colliculus (especially the superficial layer), the nucleus amygdaloideus corticalis and the dorsal hippocampus (molecular layer of the CA1 and dentate gyrus). In the anteromedial and suprarhinal cortices, [3H]SCH 23390 binding was more concentrated in layers V and VI. Moderate levels of [3H]SCH 23390 were found in the thalamus, hypothalamus, the habenula, the ventral tegmental area, the posterior cingulate and entorhinal cortices, the supragenual dopamine terminal system and the cerebellum (molecular layer). This regional distribution of [3H]SCH 23390 closely correlated (except for the cerebellum) with the reported distribution of dopaminergic terminals. The topographical distribution of [3H]SCH 23390 has also been studied in detail in striatal subregions. The density of D1 receptors was much greater in the ventrolateral sector and medial margin of the striatum than in the ventromedial and dorsolateral sectors. A rostrocaudal decrease in the densities of D1 sites was also found along the rostrocaudal axis of the caudate-putamen. These lateral to medial and anteroposterior gradients overlapped with the density of the dopaminergic afferents.