Recognition memory for single items requires the perirhinal cortex (PRH), while recognition of an item and its associated location, requires a functional interaction between the PRH, hippocampus (HPC) and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). While the precise mechanisms through which these interactions are effected are unknown, the nucleus reuniens (NRe) has bidirectional connections with each regions and hence may play a role in recognition memory. Here we investigated, in male rats, whether specific manipulations of NRe function affected performance of recognition memory for single items, object location or object-in-place associations. Permanent lesions in the NRe significantly impaired long-term but not short-term object-in-place associative recognition memory, while single item recognition memory and object location memory were unaffected. Temporary inactivation of the NRe during distinct phases of the object-in-place task, revealed its importance in both the encoding and retrieval stages of long-term associative recognition memory. Infusions of specific receptor antagonists showed that encoding was dependent on muscarinic and nicotinic cholinergic neurotransmission, in contrast, NMDA receptor neurotransmission was not required. Finally, we found that long-term object-in-place memory required protein synthesis within the NRe. These data reveal a specific role for the NRe in long-term associative recognition memory through its interactions with the HPC and mPFC, but not the PRH. The delay-dependent involvement of the NRe, suggests that it is not a simple relay station between brain regions, but rather during high mnemonic demand, facilitates interactions between the mPFC and HPC a process which requires both cholinergic neurotransmission and protein synthesis.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENTRecognising an object and its associated location, fundamental to our everyday memory requires specific hippocampal-cortical interactions, potentially facilitated by the nucleus reuniens (NRe) of the thalamus, yet the role of the NRe itself in associative recognition memory is unknown. Here we reveal the crucial role of NRe in encoding and retrieval of long-term object-in-place memory, but not for remembrance of an individual object or individual location and such involvement is cholinergic receptor and protein synthesis dependent. This is the first demonstration that the NRe is a key node within an associative recognition memory network and is not just a simple relay for information within the network. Rather, we argue, the NRe actively modulates information processing during long-term associative memory formation.