ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Alpinae Oxyphyllae Fructus (AOF) with warming and tonifying the kidney and spleen, anti-salivation, anti-polyuria and anti-diarrhea functions is the dried ripe fruits of Alpinia oxyphylla Miq. (Zingiberaceae). As a traditional Chinese medicine, its application history is very long. AIMS OF THE STUDY: The purpose of our study is to investigate the effects of different solvent extracts from AOF on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced animal model of Alzheimer's disease (AD) to elucidate the traditional medical theories with modern pharmacological methods and provide a reference for further clarifying its active components and mechanisms. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The method of stepwise screening was adopted in this paper. The animals were divided into 9 groups, including control (CT) group, model (MD) group, donepezil (DPZ) group, total extract (TT) group, petroleum ether extract (PE) group, chloroform extract (CF) group, ethyl acetate extract (EA) group, n-butanol extract (NB) group and water extract (WT) group. The anti-amnesic effects of different solvent extracts from AOF were measured in LPS-induced memory deficits mice by Y maze test and Morris water maze (MWM) test. Hematoxylin eosin (HE) staining was applied to observe pathological changes in hippocampus and cerebral cortex tissue of different groups. Biochemical indicators including ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1 (IBA-1), interleukin beta 1 (IL-1beta), Abeta1-42 and hyperphosphorylated tau proteins (p-tau) in hippocampus and cortex after treatment with LPS were measured according to the manufacturer's instructions of ELISA kits. HPLC was used to evaluate the major components of different extracts. RESULTS: It was found that successive intragastric administration of AOF (360mg/kg) extracts for 14 days showed different degrees of improvement on LPS-induced AD model as measured by Y-maze test, Morris water maze test, and Histopathological examination. Moreover, the results of ELISA suggested petroleum ether (PE) extracts were worth recommending for inhibiting the high level of IBA-1, IL-1beta, Abeta1-42 and p-tau in hippocampus and cortex after treatment with LPS. CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated for the first time that AOF attenuated LPS-induced learning and memory impairment, which may be associated with its inhibitory effect on neuroinflammation, amyloids-beta (Abeta) deposition and p-tau. This research provided a theoretical basis for elucidating the traditional theory of AOF, and was also the stepping stone to the next step.