Lead (Pb) is a neurotoxic heavy metal, but the mechanism of its neurotoxicity is not clearly understood. Expression of metallothioneins (MTs) is induced in response to heavy metal exposure as a protective mechanism against heavy metal toxicity. There are several isoforms of MTs (MT-1 to 4), of which MT-3 is the neuron specific isoform, which also has neurite growth inhibitory effects. Whereas, the induction of MT-1 and 2 in response to Pb has been reported, the effect of Pb on the expression of MT-3 in the brain has not been documented. This study aimed at investigating the effect of Pb exposure on the expression of MT-3 in the cerebrum and hippocampus. Wistar rat pups were exposed to Pb via their dams' drinking water (0.2% lead acetate in deionized water) from postnatal day (PND) 0 to 21 and directly via drinking water until PND30. Expression of MT-3 was measured by Western blot and quantitative RT-PCR. MT-3 localization was done by immunohistochemistry. Divalent metal ions were analysed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. Levels of Pb in blood and cerebrum were significantly increased, while that of copper (Cu), zinc (Zn) and manganese (Mn) were significantly decreased in the Pb-exposed rats at both PND21 and PND30. MT-3 protein was significantly increased in the cerebrum (by 2.5-fold) and in hippocampus (1.4 to 3.2-fold) in both PND21 and PND30 Pb-exposed rats over controls. MT-3 gene expression also increased in the cerebrum (by 42%), and in the hippocampus (by 65% and 43% in the PND21 and PND30 rats, respectively), in the Pb-exposed rats over controls, but the increase was statistically significant (p<0.05) only in the PND30 rats. Pb exposure significantly increased (p<0.05) percentage of MT-3 immunoreactive cells in Cornu Ammonis and dentate gyrus regions in the PND21 rats, and in the Cornu Ammonis 1, dentate gyrus and cortex regions in the PND30 rats. Our data thus provide convincing evidence that exposure to low levels of Pb during preweaning period increases the expression of MT-3 in the brain of rats.