Regarding the article titled, "Molecular analysis of Nogo expression in the hippocampus during development and following lesion and seizure," by Susan Meier, Anja U. Brauer, Bernd Heimrich, Martin E. Schwab, Robert Nitsch, and Nicolai E. Savaskan, published in the June 2003 issue of The FASEB Journal (FASEB J, 2003 Jun;17(9): 1153-1155 ; doi:10.1096/fj.02-0453fje). The editors of The FASEB Journal received a letter date June 1, 2011, from Dr. Annette Gruters-Kieslich at Charite-Universitatsmedizin Berlin stating: "In the year 2009 a series of reproaches in regard to scientific misconduct against Dr. Nicolai Savaskan reached the faculty of the Charite-Universitatsmedizin Berlin." "One of the manuscripts affected was published in the FASEB J in the year 2003: Meier S, Brauer AU, Heimrich B, Schwab ME, Nitsch R, Savaskan NE. FASEB J 2003 Jun;17(9):1153-5. A well-recognized and top-class fact finding commission concluded that the publication contains gross flaws. A key figure (Figure 14) and the conclusions drawn from it could not be underlined with the corresponding primary data. Therefore, the faculty has requested the senior author Dr. Nicolai Savaskan to retract the publication." In light of the "well-recognized and top-class fact finding" commission's conclusions and the faculty's recommendation to retract the article, the article was retracted and all versions were removed from the Web site. Since receiving this communication, Annette Gruters-Kieslich at Charite-Universitatsmedizin Berlin has contacted the journal with an additional letter stating the following: "We consulted you in writing 1 June, 2011 concerning the publication of Meier S. et al, FASEB J 2003;17(9)1153-5." "In a final evaluation of the investigations carried about by reason of the letter stating the underlying facts, we find that these investigations do not proof of intentional falsifications, manipulation of plagiarism in this work." (sic) "As a result of our investigations, we correspondingly suggest the recommendation of the Johann Gutenberg University of Mainz to publish a written erratum from the scientist, Dr. Savaskan and Prof. Nitsch, for the correction of the mistakes contained in this publication." (sic) In light of the new recommendation by Charite-Universitatsmedizin Berlin, the journal has reinstated the original article with the addition of the following erratum and addendum provided by the authors: "We have been informed about a data presentation error in one quantitative data set shown in Figure 14 B in our paper published in FASEB J (2003 Jun;17(9):1153-5. Epub 2003 Apr 8) [1]. There, the actin column for group 3 (lesion group 5DAL) is given larger, i.e. 887.7 a.u. than the original data file with 224.3 a.u. which contains the primary data actin quantification set. Nevertheless, the main conclusion of our paper given in Figure 14 A and C, i.e. the fact that an entorhinal cortex lesion induces upregulation of Nogo-A protein in the hippocampus, is not affected by this display error. We decided to repeat the experiments given in the original Figure 14 which have been performed in the years 2001-2003. We have followed the methodology as described in the original publication (Meier et al., 2003), using entorhinal cortex lesions in rats as well as the same anti-Nogo-A monoclonal antibody (11C7). For quantitative western blotting analysis, we used Image J software, and statistical analysis was performed applying Statview (Abacus, Abacus, Berkely, CA) and GraphPad Prism 5 software (La Jolla, CA). First, we investigated whether the methods and reagents (monoclonal a-Nogo-A antibody 11C7) have been appropriate and reliable. Protein extracts of postnatal day (P5) rat hippocampi, control adult hippocampi and adult hippocami 5 days after entorhinal cortex lesion were compared in immunoblot replicates ( Add. Fig. 1 ). For protein separation, we used Bis-Tris precast minigels, wet-transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Whatman BA-S 85, Dassel, Germany) and incubated with the original 11C7 antibody (long-term stored since the time of the original experiments) overnight. A single immunopositive band at the known apparent molecular weight of rat Nogo-A (approximately 190 kDa) was obtained. Nogo-A consists of 1163 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 130 kDa. However, on immunoblots, rat, cattle and human Nogo-A protein migrates at higher apparent molecular weights ranging from 190 kDa to 220 kDa due to predictive posttranslational modifications such as carbohydrate chain sites [2, 3]. P5 postnatal hippocampus showed the strongest immunosignal for Nogo-A, consistent with the data reported in our original report from 2003 [1]. Furthermore, total hippocampal protein lysates from entorhinal cortex lesioned rats 5 days after lesion (5DAL) gave stronger bands indicating higher levels of Nogo-A than in the non-lesioned control hippocampal tissue ( Add. Fig. 1 A). Actin was used as a house-keeping protein and revealed equal loading ( Add. Fig 1 B). These experiments demonstrated that the results reported in Meier et al., 2003, were correct and that the methodology and reagents used in our original report yield reliable data to study Nogo-A expression after entorhinal cortex lesion in comparison to controls ( Add. Fig. 1 ). [Figure: see text] We used this methodological approach and reagents (monoclonal a-Nogo-A antibody 11C7) to quantify the upregulation of Nogo-A using individual hippocampi of 14 rats which received an unilateral entorhinal cortex lesion performed as described in our original report in 2003 in comparison to individual hippocampi of 14 non-lesioned control rats. Immunoblots from these experiments unequivocally showed that Nogo-A is consistently upregulated in the rat hippocampus after entorhinal lesion ( Add. Fig. 2 A). Quantitative analysis confirmed our original finding reported in 2003 with increased hippocampal Nogo-A expression 5 days after entorhinal cortex lesion compared to non-lesioned adult controls ( Add. Fig. 2 B). [Figure: see text] A question also arose about the use of the Mann Whitney U-test for statistical analysis and sample size of the quantification of our in situ hybridizations in the original paper. As given in the Material & Methods section under subheading 'Quantifiction of autoradiography' we stated in the original report, that for each lesion stage, six animals have been taken (n = 6), and four animals were used as unlesioned control animals. The same information was given under the subheading 'Animals and surgery'. At least two in situ hybridization autoradiographs of adjacent brain slices were used for the quantification of signal strength (stated in Materials and Methods, Meier et al., 2003). Therefore, in the figure legends, the number of quantified in situ hybridization sections was given as n = 12 from 6 rats in each group, i.e. 2 sections x 6 animals. These data sets were applied in statistical analysis performing the Mann Whitney U-test (Statview, Abacus, Berkely, CA). We hope that this resurvey of the Material & Methods section of our original report resolves any concern on sample numbers used for statistical analysis. From these reproduced and updated experimental results it can be concluded that the findings as reported in the paper in 2003 are valid and still stand. We apologize for any confusion the erroneous display may have caused. However, there is no doubt that the finding of a Nogo-A upregulation following entorhinal cortex lesion as reported in our FASEB J paper from 2003 is based on reproducible mRNA and protein data, and thus is a biological fact."