Background: Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) can induce apoptosis in many regions of the brain including the cortex and hippocampus. However, few studies have focused on apoptosis in the hypothalamus after SAH. Although some antiapoptotic strategies have been developed for SAH, such as anti-tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) antibody, the molecular mechanisms underlying this condition have yet to be elucidated. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to evaluate whether SAH could induce apoptosis in the hypothalamus and identify the potential molecular mechanisms underlying the actions of anti-TNF-alpha antibody, as a therapeutic regimen, upon apoptosis. Materials and methods: SAH was induced in a rat model. Thirty minutes prior to SAH, anti-TNF-alpha antibody or U0126, an extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) inhibitor, was microinjected into the left lateral cerebral ventricle. In addition, phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate was injected intraperitoneally immediately after the anti-TNF-alpha antibody microinjection. Then, real-time polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry were used to detect the expression of caspase-3, bax, bcl-2, phosphorylated Erk (p-Erk) and Erk. Finally, anxiety-like behavior was identified by using open field. Results: Levels of caspase-3, bax and bcl-2, all showed a temporary rise after SAH in the hypothalamus, indicating the induction of apoptosis in this brain region. Interestingly, we found that the microinjection of anti-TNF-alpha antibody could selectively block the elevated levels of bax, suggesting the potential role of anti-TNF-alpha antibody in the inhibition of SAH-induced apoptosis in the hypothalamus. Moreover, we found that Erk activation was necessary for apoptosis after SAH and that the microinfusion of anti-TNF-alpha antibody could inhibit apoptosis by suppressing the increase of p-Erk in the hypothalamus. Finally, our data indicated that the infusion of anti-TNF-alpha antibody could improve anxiety-like behavior. Conclusion: Collectively, our data demonstrate that anti-TNF-alpha antibody attenuates apoptosis in the hypothalamus by inhibiting the activation of Erk, which plays an important role in the treatment of SAH.