Autosomal dominant lateral temporal epilepsy (ADLTE) is an inherited syndrome caused by mutations in the leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1 (LGI1) gene. It is known that glutamatergic transmission is altered in LGI1 mutant mice and seizures can be reduced by restoring LGI1 function. Yet, the mechanism underlying ADLTE is unclear. Here, we propose that seizures in male LGI1(-/-) mice are due to non-synaptic epileptiform activity in cortical neurons. We examined the intrinsic excitability of pyramidal neurons in the temporal cortex of male LGI1(-/-) mice and found that the voltage-gated K(+) channel Kv1.2 was significantly downregulated. We also found that cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2)-cyclooxygenase 2 (Cox2) signaling was enhanced in LGI1(-/-) mice. Interestingly, Cox2 inhibition effectively restored the dysregulated Kv1.2 and reduced the intrinsic excitability of pyramidal neurons. Moreover, in vivo injection of celecoxib, an FDA-approved nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, rescued the defective Kv1.2 (a approximately 1.9-fold increase), thereby alleviating the seizure susceptibility and extending the life of LGI1(-/-) mice by 5 days. In summary, we conclude that LGI1 deficiency dysregulates cPLA2-Cox2 signaling to cause hyperexcitability of cortical pyramidal neurons, and celecoxib is a potential agent to manage human ADLTE.Significance statementHaploinsufficiency of the leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1 (LGI1) gene is the major pathogenic basis for ADLTE, an inherited syndrome with no cure to date. Existing studies suggest that altered glutamatergic transmission in the hippocampus causes this disease, but the data are paradoxical. We demonstrate that the loss of LGI1 decreases Kv1.2 expression, enhances intrinsic excitability, and thereby causes epilepsy. Interestingly, we for the first time show that an FDA-approved drug, celecoxib, rescues the Kv1.2 defect and alleviates seizure susceptibility in LGI1(-/-) mice, as well as improving their survival. Thus, we suggest that celecoxib is a promising drug for the treatment of ADLTE patients.