Reduced density of the alpha4beta2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (alpha4beta2-nAChR) in the cortex and hippocampus of human brain has been reported in aging and patients with neurodegenerative disease. This study assessed the pharmacokinetic behavior of (18)F-XTRA, a new radiotracer for in vivo positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of the alpha4beta2-nAChR, particularly in extrathalamic regions of interest (ROIs) where the alpha4beta2-nAChR is less densely expressed than in thalamus. (18)F-XTRA was also used to evaluate the alpha4beta2-nAChR in hippocampus in human aging. Methods: Seventeen healthy nonsmoker adults (11 males, 6 females, ages 30-82 years) underwent PET neuroimaging over 90 or 180 minutes in a high-resolution research tomograph after bolus injection of (18)F-XTRA. Methods to quantify binding of (18)F-XTRA to the alpha4beta2-nAChR in human brain were compared, and the relationship between age and binding in the hippocampus was tested. Results:(18)F-XTRA rapidly entered the brain and time-activity curves peaked within 10 minutes after injection for extrathalamic regions and at approximately 70 minutes in the thalamus. The two-tissue compartment model (2TCM) predicted the regional time-activity curves better than the one-tissue compartment model, and total distribution volume (VT) was well identified by the 2TCM in all ROIs. VT values estimated using Logan analysis with metabolite-corrected arterial input were highly correlated with those from the 2TCM in all regions and values from 90 minute scan duration were on average within 5% of those values from 180 minutes of data. Parametric images of VT were consistent with the known distribution of the alpha4beta2-nAChR across the brain. Finally, an inverse correlation between VT in hippocampus and age was observed. Conclusion: Our results extend support for use of (18)F-XTRA with 90 minutes of emission scanning in quantitative human neuroimaging of the extrathalamic alpha4beta2-nAChR, including in studies of aging.