Serotonin (5-HT) produced 3 different types of responses in neurons of mouse hippocampal and striatal cell cultures. These 3 responses have been characterized in terms of their pharmacological specificity, physiological mechanism, and dependence on cytoplasmic components. The most frequently observed response was inhibitory and was the result of a receptor-mediated activation of an inwardly rectifying potassium conductance. Typically, the response peaked within 1-3 sec of agonist application and did not exhibit desensitization. 5-Methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine also produced this response in both striatal and hippocampal cultures and had no effect on the other 5-HT currents observed in this study. The selective 5-HT agonists--8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)-tetralin, 1-(m-chlorophenyl) piperazine, and 1-(2-methoxyphenyl) piperazine--did not activate this outward current response. Methysergide did not block the 5-HT-activated outward current and often acted as an agonist. The response was lost in low-series-resistance recordings which facilitate solution exchange between the patch electrode and the cell. The loss of this response was prevented by using high-resistance patch electrodes, which retard this exchange. The 2 other responses described in this study were excitatory. They were seen less often than the inhibitory response. One of the excitatory responses was fast, with a time to peak of approximately 200 msec and a duration of 2-4 sec. The other was slow, with a time to peak of 7-10 sec and a duration of approximately 30-40 sec. Both of these responses were accompanied by a conductance increase. The fast excitatory response reversed at depolarized potentials and desensitized with a rate that varied with voltage. Metoclopramide and d-tubocurarine completely and reversibly blocked this fast excitatory response, while methysergide had no effect. The fast excitatory response was not lost during intracellular dialysis of cells in cultures from either striatum or hippocampus. In cultures from both brain regions, the slow excitatory response was blocked by methysergide. The slow excitatory response was lost even in patch-clamp recordings with high-resistance electrodes. This response was similar to responses to dopamine, norepinephrine, and forskolin, all of which are known to activate adenylate cyclase in the CNS.