Specific antibodies raised in rabbits against 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase (EC 1.13.11.6) and quinolinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase (EC 1.13.11.6) and quinolinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.19) were used in immunohistochemical studies to map the cellular localization of the quinolinic acid metabolizing enzymes in the adult male rat brain. 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase immunoreactivity was found to be present in glial cells of presumed astroglial identity, as judged by co-localization with glial fibrillary acidic protein. 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase-immunoreactive glial cells were present in all brain regions and within major fiber tracts. The density of 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase-immunoreactive glial cells as well as the intensity of staining of these cells differed among brain regions. In general, telencephalic acid diencephalic areas harbored a larger number of 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase-positive cells than did mesencephalic regions. In the former regions the caudate nucleus, septum, nucleus accumbens, neocortex and hippocampus were particularly enriched in 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase-immunoreactive cells. In the thalamus, regional differences were noted with regard to the intensity of staining among glial cells with high densities of 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase cells in the anteroventral, reticular and ventromedial nuclei. In the inferior and superior colliculi, numerous 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase-positive glial cells were found in all layers. In the hypothalamus, 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase-immunoreactive glial cells were encountered in the zona incerta, the lateral hypothalamic area, the caudal preoptic region and in the dorsomedial nucleus. In the mesencephalon, the substantia nigra contained numerous, moderately stained cells. At caudal levels of the brain-stem, a relatively large number of cells was detected in the nucleus of the solitary tract, the pontine nucleus and in the fascial nerve nucleus, while other nuclei, such as the reticular formation and the area postrema were relatively poor in 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase-immunoreactive cells. In addition to staining of glial cells, neuronal cell bodies containing 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid oxygenase immunoreactivity were detected in the main and in the accessory olfactory bulb, as well as in the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus. Quinolinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase immunoreactivity was observed within glial cells and in association with neuronal cell bodies. Some, but not all, quinolinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase positive glial cells contained glial fibrillary acidic protein (Kohl