Experiments were performed in order to identify the sites of epileptiform burst generation in rat hippocampal CA3 pyramidal cells. A subsequent slow field potential was studied, which is associated with afterdischarge generation. Laminar field potential and current source-density (CSD) methods were employed in hippocampal slices exposed to penicillin. Simultaneous intracellular and extracellular field recordings from the CA3 pyramidal cell body layer showed that whenever an epileptiform burst was recorded extracellularly, individual CA3 neurons underwent an intense depolarization shift. In extracellular records a slow negative field potential invariably followed epileptiform burst generation. In approximately 10% of slices, synchronous afterdischarges rode on the envelope of this negative field potential. Intracellularly a depolarizing afterpotential followed the depolarization shift and was coincident with the extracellular slow negative field potential. A one-dimensional CSD analysis performed perpendicular to the CA3 cell body layer showed that during epileptiform burst generation large current sinks occur simultaneously in the central portions of both the apical and basilar dendrites. The average distance of the peak amplitude for these sinks from the center of the cell body layer was 175 +/- 46.8 microns and 158 +/- 25.0 microns, respectively. A large current source was recorded in the cell body layer. Smaller current sources were observed in the distal portions of the dendritic layers. During the postburst slow field potential a current sink was recorded at the edge of the cell body layer in stratum oriens--a region referred to as the infrapyramidal zone. Simultaneous with the current sink recorded there, smaller sinks were often observed in the dendritic layers that appeared to be "tails" or prolongations of the currents underlying burst generation. Two-dimensional analyses of these field potentials were performed on planes parallel and perpendicular to the exposed surface of the slice. Isopotential contours showed that the direction of extracellular current is mainly orthogonal to the CA3 laminae. Correction of CSD estimates made perpendicular to the cell body layer for current flowing in the other direction did not alter the location of computed current sources and sinks. In order to show that the dendritic currents associated with epileptiform burst generation were active sinks, tetrodotoxin (TTX) was applied locally to the dendrites where the current sinks were recorded.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)