A monoclonal antibody against the microtubule-associated protein MAP-2 was used to examine the fate of this molecule during post-lesion dendritic remodeling in the hippocampus and septum of adult rats. Qualitative and quantitative immunocytochemical analyses were carried out in the dentate gyrus after unilateral destruction of the entorhinal cortex (EC). An increase in MAP-2 immunoreactivity was detected in dendritic processes located in the outer 2/3 of the ipsilateral molecular layer (ML) 2 days after the lesion. whereas dendritic staining decreased considerably in the inner 1/3 of the same ML. The increase of staining was also detected 4, 6 and 8 days after the lesion; it was accompanied by an increase in the immunoreactivity in the inner 1/3 of the ML. After that period, a progressive decrease in anti-MAP-2 staining toward control levels was detected along the whole extent of the ipsilateral ML. This was concurrent with alterations in dendritic orientation, and a decrease in stained dendrites in the inner 1/3 of the ML. By 30 days post-lesion anti-MAP-2 staining was almost identical to that of the contralateral ML, although the alterations in dendritic morphology were still present in the ipsilateral ML. Changes in MAP-2 levels were also evaluated by densitometry of Western blots or dot immunobinding of hippocampal extracts obtained at different post-lesion intervals. The results obtained revealed a pattern of change in MAP-2 levels identical to that observed with the immunohistochemical stain. A similar, immunocytochemical and biochemical, analysis conducted in the lateral septal nucleus after unilateral transection of the fimbria showed no changes in the distribution and/or content of MAP-2 at any post-lesion interval analyzed (2, 10 and 20 days post-lesion). The present observations show that post-lesion dendritic remodeling is concurrent with modifications in the levels and distribution of MAP-2. These modifications suggest that the dendritic cytoskeleton is dynamically changing in response to perturbation of the synaptic environment. In addition, our results indicate that these changes may only occur in those neurons which have the capability to remodel their post-synaptic surface in response to deafferentation.