Rats exhibit morphological, biochemical, and metabolic changes in their brains, as well as cognitive deficits, with aging. Aged rats were found to be significantly impaired compared to young rats in a water maze task and test of motor coordination, and show reduced locomotor activity and exploration. Although aged rats did exhibit deficits as a group, not all aged rats were impaired. Additionally, the subgroup that was impaired on one task was not necessarily the subgroup that was impaired on another task. The cholinergic projection neurons in the basal forebrain region were significantly atrophied in the aged rodent. The degree of atrophy was highly correlated with the cognitive impairment exhibited on the Morris water maze task. Swollen choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)-positive "plaque-like" structures were observed in the neocortex of the aged but not the young rats. Declines in cholinergic activity in the brain has also been observed during aging. Biochemical measurements of ChAT in the basal forebrain region of aged rats revealed small but consistent decreases in ChAT activity compared to young rats. General metabolic activity, measured by the 2-deoxyglucose method, was also decreased in the hippocampal CA1 and CA3 fields, the dentate gyrus, the medial septal-diagonal band area, and the prefrontal cortex of aged rats. There was a significant correlation between the decrease in glucose utilization and deficits on the Morris water maze. Most aged rats exhibit pathological EEG patterns as reflected by frequent long-duration high voltage neocortical spindles (HVS) during immobility. Bilateral lesions of the nucleus basalis and scopolamine treatment increased the incidence of HVS, thereby mimicking changes in the aged brain. We attempted to ameliorate the cognitive deficits observed in subgroups or impaired rats by either: (1) implanting fetal cells of basal forebrain origin into the hippocampus, or (2) infusing nerve growth factor (NGF) chronically into the lateral ventricle. The grafts appeared to facilitate an improvement in the ability of the impaired aged rats to perform in the Morris water maze. This improved performance was reversed by injections of atropine at doses that did not affect the behavior of young animals that performed well in the same task. These results suggest that enhancement of the cholinergic system could have an effect on the performance of the impaired aged animals. The study of the effects of infusions of NGF clearly demonstrate that the ability of impaired aged rats to remember what they had previously learned was increased after NGF treatment.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)