We have localized nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the zebra finch brain by using three 125I-labelled ligands: alpha bungarotoxin and two monoclonal antibodies to neuronal nicotinic receptors (MAb 35 of Tzardos et al., J. Biol. Chem., 250: 8635-8645, '81; and MAb 270 of Whiting and Lindstrom: J. Neurosci. 6: 3061-3069, '86). Unfixed brains from intact adult male and female zebra finches were prepared for in vitro autoradiography. Low-resolution film autoradiograms and high-resolution emulsion autoradiograms were prepared for each of the three ligands. The major brain structures that bind all three of the ligands are hippocampus; hyperstriatum dorsalis; hyperstriatum ventralis; nucleus lentiformis mesencephali; nucleus pretectalis, some layers of the optic tectum; nucleus mesencephalicus lateralis; pars dorsalis; locus ceruleus; and all cranial motor nuclei except nucleus nervi hypoglossi. The major structures labelled only by [125I]-alpha bungarotoxin binding included hyperstriatum accessorium and the nuclei: preopticus medialis, medialis hypothalami posterioris, semilunaris, olivarius inferior, and the periventricular organ. Of the song control nuclei, nucleus magnocellularis of the anterior neostriatum; hyperstriatum ventralis, pars caudalis; nucleus intercollicularis; and nucleus hypoglossus were labelled. The binding patterns of the two antibodies were similar to one another but not identical. Both labelled nucleus spiriformis lateralis and nucleus geniculatus lateralis, pars ventralis especially heavily and also labelled the nucleus habenula medialis; nucleus subpretectalis; nucleus isthmi, pars magnocellularis; nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis; nucleus reticularis lateralis; nucleus tractus solitarii; nucleus vestibularis dorsolateralis; nucleus vestibularis lateralis; nucleus descendens nervi trigemini; and the deep cerebellar nuclei. Lobus parolfactorius and nucleus vestibularis medialis were labelled by only MAb 270, whereas only MAb 35 labelled nucleus laminaris and the medial and lateral pontine nuclei. These data extend previous reports of cholinergic participation in the song system (Ryan and Arnold: J. Comp. Neurol. 202: 211-219, '81) to suggest that the zebra finch song system may contain several closely related nicotinic receptors. In several brain nuclei it appeared that certain anatomical portions of a nucleus or a certain class of neurons were specifically labelled. Furthermore, in certain cases, the labelling appeared to be clustered around Nissl-stained cell nuclei, thus suggesting that the receptors are concentrated on or in somata.