The morphology and laminar distribution of immunolabeled neurons in the medial and dorsomedial telencephalic cortices of the lizard Podarcis hispanica were examined in vibratome sections after preembedding gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-immunocytochemistry. In both cortical areas and at all rostrocaudal levels, GABA-immunoreactive neurons were found in all cortical layers, with the largest number (74%) of GABA-positive cells in layer 3. GABA-positive neurons were classified into pyramidlike, vertical-fusiform, multipolar, and horizontal neurons. Cells that could be so classified were counted in each cortical lamina. In the medial cortex, multipolar and horizontal-bipolar cells dominated layer 1. Layer 2 displayed mainly horizontal and pyramidlike cells at its outer margin and pyramidlike cells at its inner margin. In layer 3, horizontal cells were the prevalent group. In the dorsomedial cortex, layer 1 mainly contained small multipolar neurons (35% of layer-1 cells) in its outer third and vertical-fusiform neurons (37% of layer-1 cells) in its inner two thirds. In layer 2, 47% of the few GABA-positive perikarya were pyramidlike. The largest population of neurons in layer 3 was that formed by multipolar cells (45% of layer-3 cells). Ultrastructural examination revealed that GABA-immunoreactive neurons possessed indented euchromatic nuclei with a central nucleolus. Their cytoplasm contained numerous mitochondria and a very well-developed granular endoplasmic reticulum. Their somata were contacted by numerous unstained boutons making asymmetric contacts and by a few symmetric synapses of GABA-positive terminals. Dendrites of GABA-immunoreactive cells were thin, with irregular outlines, and generally aspinous. Like the somata, dendrites were contacted by many unstained asymmetric synapses. Some dendritic profiles also received symmetric contacts from GABA-positive boutons. GABA-positive terminal-like puncta were found throughout the layers, with a maximal concentration in layer 2. Electron microscopy confirmed that nearly all of the puncta represent GABA-positive terminal boutons. Comparison of GABA-immunoreactive cells in Podarcis with those found in the mammalian hippocampus suggests that these cells may be inhibitory neurons, as in the hippocampus of mammals.