Few studies have dealt with the general ultrastructure and synaptic organization of grafted brain tissue. This study was therefore performed to extend current light microscopic observations on intracerebral and intraocular grafts of hippocampal tissue to the ultrastructural level. Blocks of tissue containing the hippocampus and fascia dentata from day 21 embryonic rats were grafted into the brain of developing and adult rats and to the anterior eye chamber of adult rats. After 100 or 200 days of survival the recipient rat brains or eyes were processed for electron microscopy. Tissue containing the graft dentate molecular layer and adjacent granule cell layer was selected for ultrastructural analysis, together with a few samples of the hilus and CA3. Normal dentate tissue was analyzed as control. At the light microscopic level most intracerebral and intraocular grafts displayed an organotypic organization with clearly recognizable cell and neuropil layers. Under the electron microscope the grafted granule cells had normal-appearing dendrites bearing the normal types of spines and forming the normal types of synapses. This was the case even in the absence of the normal major extrinsic afferents like the perforant path. The graft dentate granule cells formed axons and terminals with characteristics of the normal mossy fiber system in the hilus and CA3, in addition to aberrant supragranular mossy fiber terminals known from light microscopic studies of dentate transplants. Abnormal structures included a few dendritic growth cones and an increased occurrence of polyribosomes in spines. Their occurrence indicates ongoing dendritic plasticity even 100 days after transplantation. There was also an increased density of glial elements, particularly in the intraocular grafts. In some of these grafts the granule cells displayed immature traits in terms of nuclear indentations. Dentate interneurons of the basket cell type were present in both the intracerebral and the intraocular grafts. We conclude that grafted dentate granule cells, in different surroundings and without the normal, major perforant path input, can develop a basically normal cellular morphology, which includes the normal ultrastructural characteristics of the dendrites with spines and synapses, and the mossy fibers and its terminals.