Pyramidal cells of regio inferior in slice cultures of the rat hippocampus were impaled and intracellularly stained with horseradish peroxidase. A correlated light- and electron-microscopic analysis was then performed to study the properties of these neurons under culture conditions with particular emphasis on input synapses onto these cells. Like pyramidal cells in situ, CA3 pyramidal neurons in slice cultures had a triangular cell body with an apical stem dendrite emerging from it. Several basal dendrites and the axon arose from the basal pole of the cell body. The peripheral thin branches of both apical and basal dendrites were covered with small spines, whereas proximal thick dendritic segments and portions of the cell body exhibited large spines or excrescences. The axon gave off numerous fine varicose collaterals which projected to stratum radiatum of CA1 (Schaffer collaterals), to the alveus and to the hilar region. In one case a collateral could be followed to stratum moleculare of the fascia dentata. Electron-microscopic analysis of the injected pyramidal neurons revealed that their cell bodies, dendritic shafts and spines formed synaptic contacts with presynaptic terminals. Mossy fiber endings were identified by their large size and their numerous clear synaptic vesicles with some dense-core vesicles intermingled, and were observed to form synaptic contacts on the large spines or excrescences. Since extrinsic afferents degenerate in slice cultures, the numerous synaptic boutons on the identified pyramidal neurons probably arise from axons of intrinsic neurons that have sprouted in response to deafferentation. This assumption is supported by the finding that collaterals of the injected neurons formed abundant synaptic contacts on dendritic shafts and spines of other cells. These results suggest that, although pyramidal cells under culture conditions retain a remarkable number of their normal characteristics, considerable synaptic reorganization does take place.