Subcutaneous treatment of rats with low doses of lithium and pilocarpine or a high dose of pilocarpine results in a severe seizure--brain damage syndrome. Rats thus treated were studied with multiple-depth electrodes, quantitative [14C]2-deoxyglucose autoradiography, and light and electron microscopy. Rats receiving lithium-pilocarpine did not differ from high-dose pilocarpine rats in behavioral, electrographic, metabolic or histopathological findings, but lithium-pilocarpine reproduced the syndrome more reliably and with a lower acute mortality rate. Organized electrographic seizure activity developed just prior to the onset of behavioral forelimb clonus and appeared to originate from ventral forebrain in the vicinity of the ventral pallidum and/or nucleus accumbens. From these sites activity spread rapidly to involve other regions. Once initiated, electrographic seizures persisted for hours. Increased glucose utilization was found in most brain regions during the period of continuous seizure activity. The greatest increases were found in the ventral pallidum, globus pallidus, hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala, lateral septum, substantia nigra, ventrobasal and mediodorsal thalamus and frontal motor cortex. Animals sustaining seizures displayed a disseminated pattern of neural degeneration not involving globus pallidus or ventral pallidum but otherwise coinciding with the above pattern of enhanced glucose utilization. No consistent correlation was observed between the pattern of brain damage and known regions of high muscarinic cholinergic receptor density. Ultrastructurally, the cytopathological changes, like those associated with various other sustained seizure syndromes, resemble the excitotoxic type of damage glutamate is known to cause. This seizure-brain damage syndrome and that induced by systemic kainic acid appear to be similar in behavioral but not in electrophysiological or metabolic manifestations. During kainic acid seizures, electrographic changes are first recorded in the hippocampus while they are first detected in the ventral forebrain region in pilocarpine seizures. Pilocarpine also induced metabolic activation of ventral forebrain sites not activated by kainic acid. The cytopathology associated with the two syndromes is identical in type but not in pattern, the cholinergic model being characterized by much greater neocortical and slightly less hippocampal damage. Further study of these cholinergic models may provide new insights into the roles of the major excitatory neurotransmitter systems (cholinergic and glutamergic) in limbic epilepsy.