Burst structure and synchronized firing of bursts were studied, in the interictal period, using auto- and cross-correlation analyses in human amygdala neurons in temporal lobe epilepsy patients diagnosed as having a unilateral limbic seizure focus in anterior hippocampus and/or amygdala. Satisfactory single unit recordings were obtained from chronically implanted microelectrodes in 51 amygdala neurons, and auto-correlation analysis identified 27 of 51 neurons where burst firings recurred with regular interspike interval structures (structurally stable burst: S-burst). This structural stability was characteristic only for a short burst, or at the beginning of a series of repetitive firings, involving 2-5 action potentials. In 'non-epileptic' amygdala neurons located contralateral to the seizure focus, the average duration of S-burst was 15 msec and the number of action potentials (spikes) in the S-burst was inversely related to the interspike intervals in the S-burst, suggesting that endogenous membrane characteristics of non-epileptic amygdala neurons determine the patterns of S-burst. In contrast, in the seizure focus amygdala ('epileptic'), the duration of the S-burst was prolonged among epileptic neurons, not because of the occurrence of more action potentials within the S-burst, but because of a prolonged interspike interval within the S-burst. Furthermore, there was no relationship between the interspike interval and the number of action potentials in the S-burst, suggesting that synaptic inputs and/or extracellular environmental factors may affect an intrinsic mechanism for generating stable S-burst in epileptic neurons. Cross-correlation analysis identified synchronized firings in epileptic neurons: when two epileptic neurons both exhibited S-bursts, when either epileptic neuron exhibited S-burst, but never when neither exhibited S-bursts. Conversely, non-epileptic neurons rarely fired synchronously; even though they showed S-bursts. The difference in the pattern of S-bursts between epileptic and non-epileptic amygdala neurons seems to be the degree of firing synchrony. Our results provide, for the first time, direct evidence that human epileptogenic amygdala neurons recorded in vivo have unique burst firing patterns and significant synchronous excitatory interactions, different from a burst pattern found in non-epileptogenic amygdala neurons during the interictal period.