The contribution of glycoprotein synthesis to functional synaptic changes and to the formation of memory traces was investigated by autoradiographic determination of the incorporation of [3H]fucose into the hippocampal structures of rats. In the first experiment, the fucose incorporation was measured after induction of post-tetanic long-term potentiation (LTP) in granular cell synapses by repeated tetanization (200 cps) of the perforant path, and after stimulation of this hippocampal input by the same number of impulses with very low frequency (0.2 cps) not producing LTP. In the second experiment, the incorporation of fucose was determined after an active avoidance training using the stimulation of the perforant path by impulse trains of 15 cps as conditioning stimuli, and after a session of corresponding unpaired stimulations of the perforant path. Unstimulated animals were used in both experiments to measure the basal glycosylation. LTP-producing tetanization resulted only in a slight increase of incorporation into the ipsilateral hippocampal structures without significant differences to similar changes after the corresponding control stimulation with single impulses. After a session of unpaired stimulation of the perforant path with impulse trains of 15 cps only slight and inconsistent changes of incorporation occurred in the hippocampus too. However, after conditioning by the corresponding perforant path stimulation as conditioned stimulus, considerable increases of incorporation were observed in all structures of the ipsilateral hippocampus, when compared to the unpaired control stimulation. An enhanced labeling occurred also in some structures of the contralateral hippocampus mainly receiving commissural inputs. The results suggest again, that the activation of one single hippocampal afferent, even if producing LTP, would not be sufficient to induce an increased glycosylation of neuronal proteins. The increase of glycoprotein formation seems to require the convergence of several inputs, which can be assumed to occur during learning. Therefore, LTP of a single synaptic population seems not to represent the complete long-lasting memory trace, but only one of its components, or a preceding transient storage mechanism.