Memory impairment in rats with lesions of the basal forebrain (BF) and medial septal nucleus (MS) including cell bodies of the cortical and septohippocampal cholinergic systems, respectively, were compared in order to evaluate the functional contribution of the two cholinergic systems to memory. Biochemical assay revealed that lesioning of the BF and MS resulted in marked and selective decreases in both choline acetyltransferase and acetylcholinesterase activities in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, respectively. Rats with BF lesions exhibited a severe deficit in a passive avoidance task; acquisition of passive avoidance by repeated training was sluggish, and the acquired response was rapidly eliminated in a subsequent extinction test. However, only slight impairment of passive avoidance was observed in rats with MS lesions. Memory impairment in rats with BF or MS lesions was also investigated using two spatial localization tasks, the Morris water task and the 8-arm radial maze task. Both BF and MS lesions elicited a significant impairment in the Morris water task that required reference memory, as demonstrated by an apparent increase in the latency to escape onto a hidden platform in a large water tank. The impairment was much more obvious in the BF-lesioned rats. In contrast, in the radial maze task primarily requiring working memory, rats with lesions of the MS showed severe disruption, exhibiting a marked increase in total errors, a decrease in the number of initial correct responses, and an apparent change in the strategy pattern. However, corresponding changes in the rats with BF lesions were slight. These results suggest that BF lesions may lead to substantial long-term memory impairment while MS lesions may primarily produce short-term or working memory impairment, indicating a qualitatively different contribution of the two cholinergic systems to memory. It is also suggested that these two experimental animal models may be useful for evaluation of therapeutic drugs for senile dementia of the Alzheimer type.