The distribution of neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactivity in the rat brain was investigated by means of immunochemical techniques. In the first part of the study (present paper) neuropeptide Y radioimmunoassays were characterised and the chromatographic properties and regional distribution of neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactivity was investigated. The second part of the study (accompanying paper) involved immunohistochemical techniques. Extracts from several regions of rat brain were found to contain immunoreactivity that behaved like synthetic porcine neuropeptide Y in three test systems: dilution in the radioimmunoassay (test of antigenic properties), gel chromatography (molecular weight), reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography (solubility properties). Experiments were conducted to optimise the extraction of neuropeptide Y. Boiling 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, extracted at least two times as much immunoreactivity from whole brain pieces as other buffers. The nature of the extracted immunoreactivity was confirmed using chromatography. Experiments (using added iodinated or unlabelled neuropeptide Y standards) demonstrated that the differences between extraction media could not be explained by differential recovery of the peptide, although differences in recovery between media existed. Tissue sample weight was found to influence neuropeptide Y recovery. Evidence that rat neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactivity was not identical to the porcine peptide was obtained from experiments which demonstrated an early eluting peak of immunoreactivity in addition to the main peak on high performance liquid chromatograms. This material could be generated by oxidation of extracted rat neuropeptide Y, suggesting the presence in the rat peptide of a methionine residue. Some evidence of high molecular weight neuropeptide Y precursors was obtained from chromatography of hypothalamus extracts. Bovine pancreatic polypeptide-like material represented less than 1% of the amounts of neuropeptide Y in the brain. The distribution of neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactivity was non-uniform in the rat brain with highest concentrations observed in the hypothalamus, amygdaloid complex and periaqueductal central gray matter. Other regions of forebrain contained moderate to high concentrations including olfactory tubercle, striatum, nucleus accumbens, neocortex and hippocampus. Negligible amounts were detected in the cerebellum. In spinal cord immunoreactivity was concentrated in the dorsal horn, although measurable amounts were found in the ventral horn. The neurointermediate but not anterior lobe of the pituitary contained neuropeptide Y.