The distribution of neuropeptide Y (NPY) immunoreactivity in the brain of the squirrel monkey (Saimiri sciureus) was studied by means of the indirect immunofluorescence, peroxidase-antiperoxidase, and avidin-biotin-complex methods. The antiserum used was raised in rabbits and did not show any significant crossreactivity with related peptides including peptide YY and avian pancreatic polypeptide. In the upper brainstem of the squirrel monkey a dense NPY-immunoreactive terminal field is seen in lateral parabrachial area, locus coeruleus, and interpeduncular nucleus. A small group of NPY-immunoreactive cell bodies is present in the lateral habenula and a moderate number of NPY-immunoreactive fibers occurs in periaqueductal gray and nucleus raphe pallidus. The substantia nigra (SN) appears mostly devoid of NPY immunoreactivity whereas the ventral tegmental area contains a few reactive fibers. In the hypothalamus the medial preoptic area as well as the arcuate and paraventricular nuclei receive a strikingly dense NPY innervation. In addition, numerous NPY-positive cell bodies are found within the dorsomedial half of the supraoptic nucleus but very few are seen in paraventricular nucleus. A large number of NPY-immunoreactive cell bodies is also present in arcuate nucleus. In the basal telencephalon NPY-immunoreactive cells abound mostly in striatum, but some are also found in the amygdala (particularly basal, central, and lateral amygdaloid nuclei), the claustrum, and in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Intensely reactive network of NPY-immunoreactive fibers is also present in all of these structures. In striatum, the numerous, fine and non-varicose NPY-immunoreactive fibers, as well as the NPY-positive cell bodies, are slightly more abundant in caudate nucleus than in putamen. The globus pallidus (GP) is mostly devoid of NPY-immunoreactive fibers and terminals. The fact that the two major recipient structures of striatal outflow (SN and GP) do not receive significant NPY input suggests that the striatal NPY-containing neurons are intrinsically organized.