The morphology of the hippocampus and dentate gyrus in normal and reeler mice has been studied in Nissl, myelin, Golgi, Timm's sulfide silver and gold chloride-sublimate preparations. It is evident from both cell-and fiber-stained sections that despite the obvious defect in the positioning of the hippocampal pyramidal and dentate granule cells in the reeler mouse within the radial dimension, the hippocampal formation as a whole shows a normal and consistent progression of cytoarchitectonic fields along its transverse axis, and a normal and consistent progression of changes in the structure of the hippocampus and dentate gyrus along their longitudinal axes. Thus, at least in these structures, the reeler gene seems to exert its effect only in the radial dimension. Cell counts in the area dentata indicate that the number of dentate granule cells in the reeler mouse is reduced compared to that found in normal or heterozygous animals. Although it has been known for some time that the number of granule cells in the reeler cerebellar cortex is markedly reduced, this appears to be the first evidence for a reduction in cell number in a forebrain structure. All the major cell types normally found in the hippocampus and the dentate gyrus are recognizable in Golgi-stained preparations from the brains of reeler mutants. However, in both regions there are a number of abnormalities in the appearance of the cells which seem to be related to the cellular ectopia. Thus, whereas most of the pyramidal and granule cells which attain a normal position in the mutant usually have normal, or near-normal dendritic arbors, the dendrites of nearly all ectopic cells are severely distorted, both in their orientation and general configuration. In preparations stained by the Timm's sulfide silver technique it is evident that the general lamination pattern seen in normal mice is retained in the reeler hippocampus and dentate gyrus despite the gross malpositioning of many of the relevant neurons. However, although the overall laminar arrangement is preserved, there are some fairly consistent abnormalities; for example, the normal trilaminar staining pattern seen in the stratum moleculare of the dentate gyrus is replaced in the reeler by a bilaminar pattern. In gold chloride-sublimate impregnated preparations there is no obvious alignment of the astrocytes in the stratum moleculare of the dentate gyrus in either normal or reeler mice. Moreover, the distribution of the astrocytes within this zone is fairly normal in the reeler mouse, although, in general, these cells appear to be more consistently stellate in form than in normal animals.