Alterations in incorporation of tritiated lysine into protein of mouse brain and liver were observed following brief exposure to a variety of sensory stimuli. During a 15-min session, subjects were trained to perform a one-way active avoidance response or else were exposed to one of the stimulus components of the situation, including shocks, buzzers, lights, handling, and the apparatus alone. Twenty min after these behavioral treatments, tritiated lysine was injected subcutaneously, and its incorporation into total protein during a 10-min pulse was measured. Quiet mice, undisturbed until injection of the precursor, constituted the baseline group for biochemical comparisons. Most behavioral treatments increased the total amount of radioactivity in brain and liver. The treatments increased the incorporation of radioactivity into protein of both organs even more, thereby producing elevations of relative radioactivity (RR) of protein, a measure of the amount of radioactivity incorporated into protein relative to that in the acid-soluble pools. The RR increases following most of the behavioral experiences were approximately equal; however, exposure to lights or to the apparatus were less effective than the other treatments in eliciting these metabolic changes. The responses were greatly diminished in mice previously exposed to the treatments. Thus, the effectiveness of a stimulus in producing these metabolic alterations may depend upon its apparent magnitude and its novelty. The total radioactivity increases were larger in brain than in liver, while the RR increases were smaller in brain than in liver. Brain RR increases were of equal magnitude when the precursor was injected 5, 20, or 35 min after behavioral treatment, whereas the liver RR responses declined markedly over this period. Despite these differences, strong positive correlations between brain and liver across the various behavioral treatments existed. The RR changes occurred about equally in the cerebellum-brain stem, basal ganglia, hippocampus-septum, and ventral cortex, while the thalamus-hypothalamus and dorsal cortex showed smaller differences.