Norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) concentration and dopamine turnover were measured 12 days after a unilateral or bilateral noradrenergic ventral bundle (VB) transection to determine the noradrenergic projection sites and possible interactions with dopaminergic systems. Both bilateral and unilateral VB transection resulted in a significant reduction of NE of the nucleus accumbens, lateral septal nucleus, medial forebrain bundle, ventromedial nucleus, dorsomedial nucleus and medial amygdaloid nucleus. Bilateral transection also decreased NE content of the median eminence and the periventricular and arcuate nuclei. In the medial preoptic nucleus, the nucleus interstitialis striae terminalis and the central gray catecholamine area, bilateral transection significantly decreased NE concentrations while unilateral lesions had no significant effect. The anterior hypothalamic, lateral preoptic, and paraventricular nuclei responded to bilateral VB transection with a decrease in NE concentration and to unilateral lesion with a bilateral increase in NE. In the dorsal hippocampus and the caudate nucleus, bilateral lesions had no effect on NE concentrations while unilateral transection significantly decreased NE concentrations. Regions in which neither bilateral nor unilateral VB transection produced a significant change in NE content are the olfactory tubercle, the nucleus tractus diagonalis, substantia nigra pars compacta and reticulata, ventral tegmental area, habenula, superior colliculus, and the cingulate and piriform cortices. Transection of the noradrenergic ventral bundle also produced changes in dopaminergic systems suggesting a noradrenergic--dopaminergic interaction. Bilateral VB transection decreased the dopamine concentration and turnover in the nucleus accumbens, increased steady-state levels and turnover in the nucleus tractus diagonalis and increased dopamine concentration in the lateral septum. Unilateral VB transection decreased DA concentration bilaterally in the caudate nucleus, olfactory tubercle, nucleus accumbens and the nucleus interstitialis striae terminalis but increased concentrations in the substantia nigra pars reticulata (ipsilateral) and in the ventral tegmental area (bilateral). These results indicate a broad projection field for the noradrenergic ventral bundle and suggest a noradrenergic--dopaminergic interaction.