[3H]Propylbenzilylcholine mustard ([3H]PrBCM) is a synthetic, potent muscarinic antagonist, which binds specifically and irreversibly by means of a covalent linkage to muscarinic receptors. Ten micrometer coronal cryostat sections taken through unfixed rat brain at the level of the maximum extent of the caudate nucleus were mounted on glass slides and incubated with 2.4 nM [3H]PrBCM at 30 degrees C for 25 min. They showed a total binding of 3250 pmol/g protein, of which 2130 pmol/g protein was sensitive to pretreatment with 10-6 M atropine. The specific (atropine-sensitive) binding was saturable. Saturation was reached at 15 min, with a rate constant of 1.3 x 106 M-1 sec-1. Binding was unaffected by drugs acting at nicotinic receptors (D-tubocurarine, hexamethonium), or by physostigmine, but was inhibited by muscarinic drugs (pilocarpine, oxotremorine, 3-quinuclidinylbenzilate). Postfixation for 15 min in Carnoy's fixative reduced the specific binding by 10% and the non-specific by 50%. Prefixation (i.e. before incubation with [3H]PrBCM) with any fixatives containing formaldehyde largely prevented specific binding, but a range of concentrations of glutaraldehyde (2% to 0.05%) caused only small reductions in specific binding (e.g. 0.1% glutaraldehyde caused only a 6% reduction). Clear, regionally specific patterns of localization of specific label in light microscope autoradiographs could be obtained from cryostat sections prefixed with 0.1% glutaraldehyde, incubated with 2.4 nM [3H]PrBCM for 15 min at 30 degrees C, and postfixed for 15 min in Carnoy's solution. Of the 105 forebrain areas studied 12 had grain counts between 6 and 9 times the non-specific level and a further 30 had counts 4 to 6 times non-specific. The higher grain counts were in the external plexiform layer of the olfactory bulb, anterior olfactory nucleus, olfactory tubercle, pyriform cortex, stratum radiatum of the hippocampus, stratum moleculare of the dentate gyrus, lateral amygdaloid nucleus, cortico-amygdaloid transition zone, anteroventral thalamic nucleus, hypothalamic supraoptic nucleus, caudate-putamen, nucleus accumbens, and in laminae 3 and 6 of the neocortex (parietal region). There were high grain densities over the choroid plexus the lateral but not the third or fourth ventricles.