In rats under urethane anaesthesia gamma-aminobutyric acid agonists and uptake blockers were microiontophoretically applied in the pyramidal layer of CA1 and in the apical dendrites using a twin set of multibarrelled micropipettes. Thus, the somatic and dendritic field potentials elicited by commissural stimulation were recorded simultaneously and the effects of iontophoretic applications at either site studied. Somatic applications of gamma-aminobutyric acid, isoguvacine or muscimol produced an inhibition of the somatic population spike; this showed rapid fade and was followed by an "off" response i.e. an enhancement of the population spike discharge and the occurrence of a second (and occasionally third) spike. The order of potency with regard to the "off" response was muscimol greater than isoguvacine much greater than gamma-aminobutyric acid. In contrast, the inhibition of the population spike produced by 4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisoxazolo(5,4-C) pyridin 3-OL showed little fade and no prominent "off" response. The fade and "off" response were not associated with significant changes in the dendritic field excitatory postsynaptic potential concommittantly recorded and were exclusively restricted to the immediate vicinity of the pyramidal layer. Ejection of gamma-aminobutyric acid and its agonists in the stratum radiatum produced a reduction of the field excitatory postsynaptic potential and the somatic spike, this effect however showed no fade (even during prolonged applications of high doses) and no "off" response. Somatic applications of the uptake blockers nipecotic acid or guvacine consistently produced: an increase in the effectiveness of the inhibition produced by gamma-aminobutyric acid and its analogues: a decrease in the latency to peak of the inhibition and an increase in the time to recovery; a full blockade of the fade and the "off" response. All of these effects were rapid and fully reversible without significant changes in either the field excitatory postsynaptic potential or the (control) somatic spikes. The more specific glial uptake blocker, 4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisoxazolo(4,5-C) pyridin 3-OL occasionally blocked the "off" response, however it was less potent and also tended to reduce the spike amplitude. Dendritic applications of the uptake blockers reduced the excitatory postsynaptic potential and the somatic spike but failed to produce prominent changes in the action of gamma-aminobutyric acid and its analogues.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)