Although the research topics discussed in this chapter cover a substantial range of areas, methods, and behaviors, there is a consistent central issue: the alterations of brain and behavior subsequent to hippocampal lesions. The initial hypothesis that important secondary changes occur in the basal ganglia after hippocampal lesions has been sustained, at least in part, but other and unexpected results have been obtained that both clarify and mystify at the same time. The restoration of normal locomotion to animals with hippocampal damage by the application of a DAi agonist, DPI, to n. accumbens certainly supports our general idea, but the fact that membrane and transmitter changes in accumbens are transitory needs to be explained and perhaps related to alterations in DA receptor populations. The fact that intra-accumbens DPI can restore ACTH-induced excessive grooming at 28 days after hippocampal damage supports the idea that progressive changes are occurring in DA receptors in n. accumbens, but we need to know their nature more precisely. To do this, however, will probably require advances in our general knowledge of central DA receptors. One of the more interesting aspects of our observations is that the intra-accumbens administration of DPI restores normal behavioral patterns in several types of behaviors, especially locomotion and the excessive grooming response. These two behaviors are not closely linked in nature because large changes can occur in them independently, given appropriate conditions for testing. On the basis of available evidence both of these behaviors seem linked to activities in forebrain DA systems. This would further support the idea that the hippocampus modulates DA activities in basal ganglia systems. The results that suggest the presence of multiple sites for the central induction of grooming were also unexpected. As evidence mounts in support of this idea, it is likely that the one located in n. accumbens is more influenced by hippocampal destruction than the region(s) affected by icv neuropeptide administration. The interactions that take place in the basal ganglia can be extensive. Afferents from the entirety of the neocortical surface, the limbic system, and the projections from the brainstem DA cell groups meet in the striatum and ventral striatum. The efferents from this region not only reach motor cortical and subcortical sites but also project back onto diffusely projecting monoaminergic cells of the brainstem.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)