The effect of exogenous GM1 ganglioside on the 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine (5,7-HT; a selective serotonin neurotoxin) induced alteration of the postnatal development of central 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT; serotonin) neurons has been investigated using neuro-chemical and immunocytochemical techniques. Neonatal 5,7-HT (50 mg/kg s.c.) treatment is known to lead to a marked and a permanent degeneration of distant 5-HT nerve terminal projections (e.g. in cerebral cortex, hippocampus and spinal cord), while projections close to the 5-HT perikarya in the mesencephalon and pons-medulla increase their nerve density. These regional alterations are reflected by decreases and increases, respectively, of endogenous 5-HT, [3H]5-HT uptake in vitro and number of 5-HT nerve terminals demonstrated by immunocytochemistry. Treatment of newborn rats with GM1 (4 X 30 mg/kg s.c.; 24 h interval) had no significant effect on the postnatal development of 5-HT neurons. GM1 administration had furthermore no effect on the 5,7-HT induced alteration of the regional 5-HT levels and [3H]5-HT uptake in the cerebral cortex acutely, indicating that GM1 did not significantly interfere with the primary neurodegenerative actions of 5,7-HT. At the age of 1 month a clear counteracting effect of GM1 was observed, in particular of the 5,7-HT induced 5-HT denervations. The 5-HT levels in the frontal and occipital cortex were reduced to 25 and 20% of control after 5,7-HT alone, while these values were 70 and 40%, respectively, after 5,7-HT and GM1 treatment. A similar antagonizing effect of GM1 was found in the frontal cortex when measuring [3H]5-HT uptake. GM1 treatment also caused a minor reduction of the 5,7-HT induced increase of the 5-HT levels in striatum and mesencephalon. Quantitation of 5-HT nerve terminal density in sections processed for 5-HT immunocytochemistry using an automatic image analysis system showed markedly more nerve terminals in the frontal and occipital cortex after 5,7-HT + GM1 compared to 5,7-HT treatment alone. Minor counteracting effects of GM1 were noted in the hippocampus and spinal cord (thoracic-lumbar) as evaluated by chemical 5-HT assay, although substantial counteracting effects were observed locally in these areas by quantitative immunocytochemistry.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)