The enkephalin-related heptapeptide, Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met-Arg-Phe, forms the C-terminus of a biosynthetic precursor that contains both Met-enkephalin and Leu-enkephalin sequences. We have studied the distribution of heptapeptide-like immunoreactivity in rat brain by immunohistochemistry using a C-terminal specific antiserum. The results were compared with those obtained using an antiserum specific for the C-terminus of Met-enkephalin which does not react with C-terminally-extended variants. Both antisera specifically stained cell bodies and fibres in many regions of the rat central nervous system. Colchicine was needed for the demonstration of cell bodies with the Met-enkephalin antiserum, but not for the heptapeptide antiserum. In the nucleus of the solitary tract, in the commissural nucleus, the nucleus raphe obscurus and in the hypothalamus, studies of serial sections and re-staining experiments indicated that the two antisera stained the same cell bodies. However, in the olfactory bulb, the anterior olfactory nucleus, the olfactory tubercle, the nucleus accumbens, caudate-putamen, central nucleus of the amygdala, nucleus interstitialis striae terminalis, pre-lateral mamillary nuclei, ventral hypothalamus, hippocampus, peri-aqueductal grey and the granular layer of the cerebellum, cells were stained by the heptapeptide antiserum but not the Met-enkephalin antiserum. The two antisera revealed similar patterns of staining of nerve fibres in many regions including hypothalamus, central nucleus of the amygdala, lateral septum, thalamus, mid-brain and spinal cord. But in other areas notably, pallidum, caudate-putamen, substantia inominata, nucleus of the solitary tract and commissural nucleus, there were abundant fibres and terminals revealed by the Met-enkephalin antiserum but not by the heptapeptide antiserum. The results are discussed with respect to possible patterns of enkephalin biosynthesis; it is suggested that in some neurones immunoreactive enkephalin precursors terminating in the heptapeptide sequence are processed to produce the heptapeptide which is stored in terminals and is available for release as an endogenous opioid agonist in its own right. In other cases, however, it is suggested that the heptapeptide might be cleaved by removal of -Arg-Phe to yield Met-enkephalin which is the primary opioid product of this class of neurone.