The effect of three modes of anesthesia was evaluated with regard to regional damage to central cyclic nucleotide systems in the gerbil brain as a consequence of bilateral ischemia (clamping the common carotids) followed by various periods of recirculation. The injection of thiopental as much as 90 min before stroke prevented damage to chemical activation [catecholamines, guanosine triphosphate (GTP), or forskolin] of adenylate cyclase. However, the basal enzyme activity was lower in all brain regions whether thiopental was administered to stroke or sham-operated animals. Injection of ketamine drastically shortened the survival times of gerbils undergoing stroke followed by recirculation. About 90% of the animals could tolerate a maximum of only 15 min stroke with 15 min recirculation. At this time frame the patterns of activation of adenylate cyclase in only the olfactory tubercle and hippocampus were altered. When procaine was used as a local anesthetic agent during surgery, damage to catecholamine-, GTP-, or forskolin-activated adenylate cyclase was evident to varying degrees in the frontal cortex, hippocampus or olfactory tubercle, but not in the nucleus accumbens and olfactory bulb of gerbils subjected to 60-min stroke followed by 15 or 150 min of recirculation. The degree of enzyme damage was neither correlated with the fed vs. fasted state of the animal nor with the whole blood concentration of glucose. A depression in the amplitude of visually evoked potentials correlated to neurological signs and to enzyme damage. During anesthesia, ketamine increased steady-state concentrations of cyclic AMP in the frontal cortex and hippocampus from gerbil brains that had been rapidly inactivated by microwave irradiation. Thiopental increased steady-state cyclic AMP in only the olfactory tubercle. Cyclic GMP concentrations were unchanged by any anesthetic agent. In animals completely recovering from anesthesia and occluded for a brief period followed by 10 min of reflow, steady-state concentrations of only cyclic AMP were augmented.