In the hippocampus, antibody raised against vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) labeled perikarya and processes of non-pyramidal neurons whereas these structures remained unlabeled in pyramidal cells and granule cells. In the present study, VIP-immunostaining was used to investigate the fine structure and synaptic connections of identified non-pyramidal neurons and of immunoreactive axon terminals in the CA1 region of the rat hippocampus by means of electron microscopic immunocytochemistry. From a number of cells studied, two VIP-like immunoreactive non-pyramidal neurons in the regio superior were selected for an electron microscopic analysis of serial thin sections. These cells were different with regard to the location of their cell bodies and the orientation of their dendrites. One cell was located in the stratum lacunosum-moleculare with dendritic processes oriented parallel to the hippocampal fissure. The second neuron was found in the inner one-third of the stratum radiatum. The dendrites of this cell ran nearly parallel to the ascending apical dendrites of the pyramidal cells. Both cells had a round or ovoid perikaryon and an infolded nucleus. The aspinous dendrites of both neurons were densely covered with synaptic boutons. These terminals were small, filled with spherical vesicles, and established asymmetric synaptic contacts. No variations in the fine structure of the presynaptic boutons were found along the course of the labeled dendrites through the various hippocampal layers, although different afferents are known to terminate in these layers. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-like immunopositive axon terminals course through all layers of the hippocampus. In the stratum pyramidale they established symmetric synaptic contacts with the perikarya of pyramidal cells. In the stratum radiatum they made symmetric contacts with the shafts of apical dendrites of pyramidal cells but never contacted dendritic spines. The symmetric contacts with pyramidal cell perikarya suggest an involvement of the VIP-like immunoreactive axon terminals in pyramidal cell inhibition.