Forty different brain samples, consisting of neocortical, archicortical, and paleocortical areas; telencephalic, diencephalic, and mesencephalic subcortical nuclei; and the cerebellum as well as some of the corresponding white matter bundles were analyzed with respect to total content of ganglioside-sialic acid and the ganglioside pattern. The total content of gangliosides seems to depend mainly on the proportions of gray and white matter. Thus, neocortical areas, which are rich in gray matter, have a four- to fivefold higher ganglioside content (per milligram of protein) than white matter-rich samples such as optic chiasm, capsula interna, or corpus callosum. White matter-rich regions, although very heterogeneous in ganglioside composition, are further characterized by appreciable amounts of the myelin-enriched GM4. In the neocortex a remarkable degree of regional pattern differences was revealed. In the frontal and parietal areas there is a moderate, and in the temporal region a strong preponderance of sialic acid bound to gangliosides of the a-pathway (GD1a, GM1). In contrast, the occipital cortex favors the b-pathway of ganglioside synthesis (GQ1b, GT1b, GD1b). A predominance of "b-gangliosides" was found in all structures that are related to the visual system (optic chiasm, pulvinar-thalamus, superior colliculi, visual cortex) as well as in the cerebellum and the nucleus ruber. All diencephalic nuclei tend to favor slightly "b-gangliosides," while the mesencephalic nuclei are very heterogeneous in their ganglioside composition. A preponderance of "a-gangliosides" was found in the periamygdalar cortex, putamen, inferior colliculi, substantia nigra, frontal white matter, internal capsule, globus pallidus, basal nucleus of Meynert, and corpus callosum as well as in the frontal, parietal, and temporal cortices. An exceptional predominance of GM1 and GD1a was revealed for the hippocampal archicortex and the amygdala, suggesting a possible functional correlation to glutaminergic synaptic transmission.