The inhibitory effect on monoamine oxidase (MAO) of the reversible MAO-A inhibitor (+)-4-dimethylamino-2,alpha-dimethylphenethylamine [amiflamine, FLA 336(+)] was evaluated in the rat after acute and repeated (twice daily for two weeks) oral treatment. MAO activity was measured ex vivo in slices from the hypothalamus and the duodenum for both MAO-A and MAO-B. Amiflamine selectively inhibited the A form of MAO after repeated as well as after acute treatment (ED50 approximately 7 mumoles/kg both acute and repeated). In the brain slices this inhibition corresponded to a decrease in the concentration of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) and to an increase in the concentration of 5-HT in the hypothalamus, the hippocampus and the striatum. The concentration of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) was decreased in the striatum to the same extent as the decrease in the 5-HIAA concentrations. The effect on the homovanillic acid (HVA) concentration was somewhat weaker as was the increase in the concentration of dopamine. No essential difference was found after acute and chronic treatment on the amine and metabolite levels. The MAO activity returned to normal 24 hours after final dosing. A large difference between the neuronal and the extraneuronal protection against the phenelzine-induced irreversible MAO inhibition in the hypothalamus was found after both acute and repeated treatment. The ED50 of the protection within the serotonergic neurons was 1.3 mumoles/kg p.o. (acute) and 0.75 mumoles/kg p.o. (repeated). Amiflamine was 3 times less potent within noradrenergic neurons than within serotonergic neurons. A brain to plasma ratio of about 20:1 was found for amiflamine and its metabolites. The plasma and the brain concentrations of the N-demethylated metabolite [FLA 788(+)] exceeded that of amiflamine after a single dose, whereas the N,N-demethylated [FLA 668(+)] was found in low concentrations. The effect on MAO-A correlated significantly with the plasma and the brain concentration of FLA 788(+).