The dorsolateral quadrant of the lateral septal nucleus receives a bilateral projection from the fimbria. When the fimbria of one side is cut, the axons of the remaining fimbria take over its synaptic sites preferentially, but when both fimbrias are cut the sites are reinnervated by non-fimbrial axons. To explore the basis of this preference, the present study plots the time courses of the appearance and disappearance of degenerating synapses, and the loss and recovery of non-degenerating synapses after ipsi-, contra- and bi-lateral fimbrial lesions. A preliminary investigation showed that at any time after these three lesions there was no change in the numerical density per unit area of 'control' structures such as shaft synapses (which do not degenerate) and neuronal perikarya (which neither shrink nor degenerate). This indicates that the changes in the numerical density of fimbrial (spine) synapses can be used as a measure of the processes of deafferentation and reinnervation without the danger of the numerical data being distorted by shrinkage. In the sampled area, the ipsilateral fimbrial axons account for about 45% of the synapses and the contralateral fimbrial axons for 25%. The number of degenerating synapses appearing at any one time underestimates the loss of non-degenerating synapses by about one-third, and a photographic simulation of degeneration suggests that a major factor in this discrepancy is the difficulty in recognizing degenerating synapses. Our main finding is that there is a major delay in the rate of removal of degeneration, and in the rate of reinnervation, after bilateral as opposed to unilateral lesions. This delay cannot be accounted for in any simple way by the greater amounts of degeneration. Thus after unilateral lesions, which cause the turnover of 25% (contralateral) or 45% (ipsilateral) of the synapses, 50% of the degeneration is removed in 1-2 days after the peak, whereas after bilateral lesions, which affect 70% of the synapses, it takes 20 days for 50% of the degeneration to be removed. That the synaptic changes after bilateral lesions involve a qualitatively different mechanism is also suggested by the observations of a much greater proportional increase in the multiple synapse index, and a decreased astroglial response.