We studied the involvement of the cholinergic system in the contralateral head-eye-body turning induced in the cat through stimulation of the pulvinar-lateralis posterior nucleus complex (P-LP). In 17 cats through a cannula aimed at the P-LP, agonists and antagonists of the cholinergic system were injected. The electrical activity of the P-LP could be recorded through the same cannula or through electrodes attached to it. In addition, electrodes were implanted ipsilaterally in the dorsal hippocampus, caudate nucleus, amygdala, and superior colliculus to record through them and through one screw placed on the skull the electrical activity of those structures and of the cortical P-LP projection. Seven days after surgery, carbachol, an agonist of the cholinergic system was injected in the P-LP, and the behavior and electrical activity of the unrestrained cat (previously accustomed to a plastic cage) were recorded. A control volume of 0.9% NaCl was always injected previously. The usual drug volume injected was 1 microliter; occasionally, 2 microliter were injected. Weekly or biweekly sessions were conducted to determine (a) the threshold for cholinergic activation, (b) the threshold for turning behavior, (c) the blocking effect of local atropine sulfate injected previously, (d) the effect of haloperidol previously injected (locally or systemically), and (e) the effect of dioxolane, an exclusive muscarinic agonist. In 14 of 17 cats, contralateral turning behavior was evoked by carbachol. In two of the three cats that did not respond to carbachol, dioxolane induced turning. The effect of dioxolane was similar to that of carbachol when tried in five cats. Besides turning behavior, carbachol produced numerous symptoms due to cholinergic activation. Atropine blocked the rotational effect of carbachol in all cats, and haloperidol blocked it in 68% of them. Electrolytic coagulation of the dorsal hippocampus surrounding the P-LP did not disturb the effects induced by carbachol. These experiments show that both systems of the P-LP, cholinergic and catecholaminergic, are involved in the contralateral turning. We conclude that the effect induced by carbachol is due to activation of muscarinic receptors because it is totally blocked by local atropine sulfate and is reproduced by dioxolane, an exclusive muscarinic agonist.