The locally subnormal brain metabolism observed in some experiments utilizing the Sokoloff 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) method has often been attributed to postsynaptic inhibition despite the fact that inhibitory postsynaptic potentials are themselves caused by energy-requiring mechanisms. To explore this issue, neurophysiologically confirmed long-duration recurrent inhibition of hippocampal pyramidal unit firing was induced by low frequency (2 to 4 Hz) stimulation of the fornix for 60 min following intravenous infusion of [14C]-2-DG. The resulting autoradiograms showed that long-duration suppression of pyramidal cell firing was accompanied by distinctly increased hippocampal 2-DG uptake, particularly in the stratum pyramidale, which contains a dense plexus of inhibitory interneuronal terminals upon pyramidal cells. Both the pyramidal inhibition and the increased 2-DG uptake were confined to the ipsilateral hippocampus in animals with previously severed fornices and hippocampal commissures. In a second series of rats, the excitatory entorhinohippocampal "perforant path" (PP) was stimulated at low frequency (2 to 9 Hz) following 2-DG administration. At 2 to 4 Hz, each PP stimulation resulted in a brief burst of pyramidal unit firing followed by short-duration firing suppression; this result was associated with paradoxically decreased 2-DG uptake in the ipsilateral stratum molecular. By contrast, 7 to 9 Hz entorhinal stimulation induced PP-mediated excitation immediately followed by powerful intrinsic hippocampal inhibition, evidenced by prolonged pyramidal unit suppression after each stimulation. This suppression was accompanied by increased 2-DG uptake in the dentate stratum molecular and hippocampal stratum pyramidale. Thus it appeared that even with entorhinal stimulation, hippocampal 2-DG uptake was more closely associated with long-duration recurrent inhibition than with transient pyramidal excitation. Therefore, although it still remains possible that regions of hypometabolism observed in some previous 2-DG studies may actually reflect mild inhibition, other mechanisms such as disfacilitation are more likely mechanisms for this metabolic pattern.