The afferent connections of the main and accessory olfactory bulbs in the rat were examined by injecting horseradish peroxidase (HRP) into one or the other of these structures either by microelectrophoresis or by hydraulic pressure. Alternate sections were stained with newly developed HRP-procedures using either benzidine dihydrochloride (de Olmos and Heimer, '77) or tetramethyl-benzidine. Eighteen to twenty-four hours after unilateral HRP injections confined to the main olfactory bulb, a large number of HRP-labeled perikaria appeared in the following telencephalic structures on the ipsilateral side: All portions of the anterior olfactory nucleus (AON) except its external part, the lateral transitional field (LT) between AON and the paleocortex, the whole extent of the primary olfactory cortex (POC); the medial forebrain bundle area deep to the olfactory tubercle, the nucleus of the horizontal limb of the diagonal band (NHDB) and the nucleus of the lateral olfactory tract (NLOT). A moderate to small number of labeled cells, furthermore, were seen in the dorsal (DT) and medial (MT) transition fields, the ventral praecommissural hippocampus (tt2), the ventral superficial part of the nucleus of the vertical limb of the diagonal band (NVDB), the sublenticular part of the substantia innominata (SI), the anterior amygdaloid area, the posterolateral cortical amygdaloid nucleus (C2) and the transition region (28 L') between the olfactory cortex and the lateral entorhinal area proper. On the contralateral side a large number of labeled cells were found in all parts of the AON, with especially heavy labeling in its external part. A moderate number of labeled cells could also be detected in the lateral transition field (LT) and the NLOT. In the diencephalon and the brain stem a moderate number of HRP-labeled perikaria were observed in the dorsal, perifornical, and lateral hypothalamus, as well as in locus coeruleus and the dorsal and medial raphae nuclei. Following large HRP injections in the main olfactory bulb a moderate to small number of labeled cells were seen also in the posterior and premammillary hypothalamus and in field CA1 of the retrocommissural hippocampus on the ipsilateral side, as well as in POC on the contralateral side. It is possible, however, that the uptake of label took place in an undetected pool of HRP in the very rostal part of AON rather than in the olfactory bulb. HRP injections in the accessory olfactory bulb resulted in labeled neurons in the posterior ventro-lateral part of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, the nucleus of the accessory olfactory tract, the rostrodorsal portions of the medial amygdaloid nucleus, and the whole extent of the posteromedial cortical amygdaloid nucleus (C3) on the ipsilateral side. A few lightly labeled cells were seen also in the contralateral C3.