The cortical afferentation of the nucleus accumbens in the cat was studied with the aid of retrograde tracing techniques. Retrograde experiments were carried out with horseradish peroxidase or one of the fluorescent tracers Bisbenzimid, Nuclear Yellow and Fast Blue. In the anterograde experiments [3H]leucine and [35S]methionine were used as tracers. Following injections in the nucleus accumbens, retrogradely-labelled cells were found in the medial frontal cortex, the anterior olfactory nucleus, the posterior part of the insular cortex, the endopiriform nucleus, the amygdalo-hippocampal area, the entorhinal and perirhinal cortices and the subiculum of the hippocampal formation. In the medial frontal cortex most of the labelled cells were found in layers III and V of the prelimbic area (area 32 of Brodmann), but retrogradely-filled neurons were also present in the infralimbic area and in the caudoventral part of the lateral bank of the proreal gyrus. Retrogradely-labelled cells in the entorhinal and perirhinal cortices were located in the deep cellular layers. Following large injections in the nucleus accumbens, retrograde labelling in the subiculum extended from the most dorsal, septal pole to the most ventral, temporal pole. Injections of anterograde tracers were placed in the frontal cortex, the entorhinal and perirhinal cortices and the hippocampal formation. The prelimbic area was found to project via the internal capsule to mainly the rostral half of the nucleus accumbens, whereas in the caudal half of the nucleus only a lateral region receives frontal cortical fibres. Following injections in the infralimbic area only fibres passing through the nucleus accumbens were labelled. Afferents from the entorhinal and perirhinal cortices reach the nucleus accumbens by way of the external capsule and terminate mainly in a ventral zone of the nucleus accumbens. Afferents from the entorhinal area are distributed to the entire accumbens, whereas the termination field of the perirhinal afferents is largely restricted to the lateral part of the nucleus accumbens. Both the frontal cortex and the entorhinal and perirhinal cortices appear to project also to the nucleus caudatus and the tuberculum olfactorium. These cortical areas also project to the contralateral striatum. Both anterograde and retrograde tracing experiments demonstrated a topographical relationship between the subiculum and the nucleus accumbens. The ventral pole of the subiculum projects via the fornix to the medial part of the caudal half of the nucleus accumbens and to a small dorsomedial area in its rostral half. Successively more dorsal portions in the subiculum project to successively more ventrolateral parts in the rostral nucleus accumbens. The projection from the hippocampus was found to extend also to the tuberculum olfactorium. The results of the present study do not provide unambiguous criteria for the delimitation of the nucleus accumbens in the cat.