Cerebral cortical membranes and supernatant from rat were prepared by centrifugation of tissue homogenates at 45,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant fraction thus obtained was found to significantly inhibit alpha-bungarotoxin binding to the membrane preparation. After a 3 min incubation period, the supernatant inhibited toxin binding by approximately 65%, while the inhibition declined to about 40% after 30 min of incubation, presumably due to the slow reversibility of alpha-bungarotoxin binding. The choice of buffer was found to be an important determinant of the degree of inhibition observed, with 10 mM Tris pH 7.4 providing the most effective condition. This inhibition of toxin binding to cortical membranes by the 45,000 g supernatant was shown not to be due to adsorption of the radiolabeled compound to soluble or residual particulate material in the supernatant fraction. Specificity of the supernatant for the alpha-bungarotoxin site was demonstrated; a supernatant fraction could be prepared which inhibited alpha-bungarotoxin binding by 50% but had no effect on [3H]spiroperidol (DA2 and 5-HT2), [3H]prazosin (alpha 1-adrenergic, [3H]5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT1) and [3H]quinuclidinylbenzilate (muscarinic cholinergic) binding. The inhibition of toxin binding also occurred in several other CNS regions including hippocampus, brainstem, spinal cord and cerebellum with an 80 to 90% inhibition of binding occurring in the latter two regions. In addition, the 45,000 g cortical supernatant completely prevented the binding of alpha-bungarotoxin to extrajunctional neuromuscular receptors and inhibited the binding to junctional receptors by 50%. Supernatants prepared from heart, liver and kidney or bovine serum albumin, at a concentration similar to the supernatant fraction, did not alter radiolabeled toxin binding to cortical membranes, while supernatant prepared from striated muscle tissue was effective. These results suggest there may be an endogenous ligand for the alpha-bungarotoxin 2.2 binding site in tissues which receive nicotinic cholinergic innervation.