Administration of ethanol and nutrients to rats thrice daily by gavage for 3 days produced a linear increase in physical dependence during the first 3 days and a 2% increase in body weight. Rates of protein synthesis on free and membrane-bound polysomes in whole brain and in 7 brain regions, comprising the entire brain, were measured in vivo under pool expansion conditions with [3H]leucine at intervals during the development and decay of ethanol dependence. During dependence development there was a progressive decrease in the rate of protein synthesis on free polysomes, but this change was not significant (P less than 0.05) until the third day, and a decrease in the rate on membrane-bound polysomes after 3 days. The inhibition of protein synthesis is attributable to a decreased rate of polypeptide elongation. There was no change in brain weight, DNA content, ribosome content, ribosome distribution of mRNA pool size. There was, however, a decrease in leucine uptake after 3 days. In an attempt to distinguish between the acute effects of ethanol on regional rates of protein synthesis and those changes associated with dependence development, rates were measured 1.5 h after administering a 5 g/kg dose of ethanol to both control and dependent rats. Rates on free polysomes in the hippocampus-amygdala and thalamus-hypothalamus and on membrane-bound polysomes in the cerebellum and hippocampus-amygdala of dependent rats were reduced; however, there was a general reduction in the rates in control rats that may have obscured reductions in other regions from dependent rats. During early withdrawal, 12 h after the last dose of ethanol, there was an increase in the rate of free polysomes in the pons-medulla and striatum-septum and on membrane-bound polysomes in the hippocampus-amygdala, and a decrease in the rate on free polysomes in the cortex and thalamus-hypothalamus and on membrane-bound polysomes in the cortex. After 24 h, there was an increase in the rate on free polysomes in all regions (cerebellum, cortex, mesencephalon, striatum-septum and thalamus-hypothalamus) except the hippocampus-amygdala and pons-medulla and an increase in the rate on membrane-bound polysomes in all regions (cortex, hippocampus-amygdala, mesencephalon, pons-medulla and striatum-septum) except the cerebellum and thalamus-hypothalamus. The possible relationship of these changes to the homeostat hypothesis of ethanol dependence is discussed.