Following sequential intraocular transplantations of areas containing NE cell bodies (locus coeruleus or superior cervical ganglion) and of NE fiber target areas (hippocampus), both pieces mature in a manner analogous to that observed for individual transplants. NE-containing nerve fibers, derived from either LC or SCG transplants, can be seen to invade the hippocampal formation. When LC is used, the invading fibers markedly hyperinnervate the hippocampus while SCG-derived fiber densities approximate those seen with innervation from the adrenergic ground plexus of the iris. Electrophysiological recordings from neurons in the LC reveal an atropine-sensitive excitatory response to illumination, suggesting innervation of the LC by cholinergic nerve fibers from the iris. This is supported by the fact that dense cholinesterase-positive staining can be found in the LC piece. Application of an epileptogenic agent, such as penicillin, results in a marked excitation of neurons in the LC without inducing epileptiform activity in the hippocampus. In contrast, single hippocampal grafts seize readily after penicillin. Local application of the inhibitory agent GABA into the LC allows penicillin-induced epileptiform activity to generate in the hippocampus, suggesting that functional inhibitory innervation develops between NE fibers derived from LC and pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus. Supporting this, subsequent excitation of LC neurons by iontophoresis of glutamate terminates the hippocampal seizure. Prior administration of reserpine (2.5 mg/kg) disrupts the inhibitory influence of LC innervation on the hippocampal EEG following penicillin. After reserpine, the hippocampal portions of double grafts behave like single hippocampal transplants. It is concluded that sequential transplantations of cell body and target regions of the CNS to the anterior chamber of the eye creates a functional, yet isolated, neuronal pathway which can be utilized to study the development of neuronal connections.