Reports of glucocorticoid effects on neurotrophin expression suggest that adrenal hormones may contribute to the pattern of changes in the expression of these factors induced by neuronal activity and seizures. To examine this possibility, the present study evaluated the influence of adrenalectomy on basal expression and seizure-induced alterations in levels of nerve growth factor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, and neurotrophin-3 messenger RNAs in hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and superficial neocortex. For determination of hormone effects on basal expression, adult male rats were adrenalectomized and killed 10-14 days later with paired adrenal-intact controls. For studies of adrenal steroid involvement in expression following seizure, adrenalectomized and adrenal-intact rats received a seizure-producing lesion of the dentate gyrus hilus. Changes in neurotrophin messenger RNA content were assessed by quantitative in situ hybridization. Adrenalectomy alone had no significant effect on brain-derived neurotrophic factor messenger RNA content but did result in cell-specific decreases in nerve growth factor and neurotrophin-3 messenger RNAs. Nerve growth factor messenger RNA levels were reduced in hippocampal stratum granulosum, entorhinal cortex, and neocortex but not in cells of the hippocampal molecular layers or hilus. With adrenalectomy, neurotrophin-3 messenger RNA was virtually eliminated from CA2 stratum pyramidale, partially reduced in stratum granulosum, but unaffected in neurons of the hippocampal molecular layers or entorhinal cortex. These effects were partially reversed by corticosterone (2 mg/l) supplement to the drinking saline. In experimental-seizure rats, adrenalectomy did not alter the direction or basic pattern of seizure-induced changes in neurotrophin expression but did change the time courses and magnitudes of these effects. In all areas measured, brain-derived neurotrophic factor messenger RNA content was more greatly and persistently elevated by seizure in adrenalectomized as compared with adrenal-intact rats. In contrast, with adrenalectomy seizures induced smaller increases in nerve growth factor messenger RNA content. Adrenalectomy augmented the decrease in neurotrophin-3 messenger RNA induced by seizure in hippocampus but not in entorhinal cortex. These results demonstrate that adrenal hormones play a major role in the regulation of basal nerve growth factor and neurotrophin-3 messenger RNA expression by specific populations of forebrain neurons. Moreover, the adrenal steroids have opposite effects on activity-dependent changes in brain-derived neurotrophic factor and nerve growth factor messenger RNA levels but are not required for the basic pattern of changes in neurotrophin messenger RNA expression elicited by recurrent seizures.