It has been hypothesized that, in Alzheimer's disease, glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity contributes to the degeneration of selected populations of neurons. In the present study, immunocytochemical techniques were used to determine the distribution and anatomical features of GluR1- and GluR2/3-immunolabeled cell bodies and processes within the hippocampal formation of normal (i.e., no pathology) elderly humans. The results of this study provide an essential baseline with which to compare the expression and distribution of glutamate receptor subunits within the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease. With respect to GluR1 immunoreactivity, the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus displays the most intense immunolabeling of any hippocampal structure. Contributing to this intense labeling are apical dendrites that arise from neurons within the adjacent granule cell layer. Interestingly, GluR1-labeled neurons account for a relatively small percentage of the total number of neurons as revealed by Nissl staining in the granule cell layer. In contrast, GluR2/3-labeled neurons are densely distributed throughout the granule cell layer, yet they provide relatively few processes to the adjacent molecular layer compared to GluR1-positive processes. GluR1 labeling is also prominent within the CA fields of Ammon's horn, with CA2 > CA3 > CA1 > or = CA4. Most prominent within the CA fields are the labeled dendrites of pyramidal neurons. In many instances, apical dendrites can be traced into the adjacent stratum radiatum, where they impart a deep striated appearance to this region of the hippocampus. Robust GluR2/3 labeling is also observed within the pyramidal layer of Ammon's horn, with an order of staining intensity similar to that observed for GluR1. However, unlike GluR1 labeling, which is localized predominantly along dendrites, GluR2/3 labeling is observed primarily in association with cell bodies. Collectively, these data suggest that the molecular composition of the AMPA receptor complex may differ between the dendrite and soma of granule and pyramidal neurons within the hippocampal formation, so functionally we may predict that these two regions of the neuron would respond differently following glutamate receptor stimulation.