The distribution of the immunoreactivity to nitric oxide synthase has been examined from rostral to caudal areas of the rat central nervous system using light microscopy. Endogenous nitric oxide synthase was located using a specific polyclonal antiserum, produced against affinity purified nitric oxide synthase from whole rat brain, following the avidin-biotin peroxidase procedure. Immunoreactive cell bodies and processes showed a widespread distribution in the brain. In the telencephalon, immunoreactive structures were distributed in all areas of the cerebral cortex, the ventral endopiriform nucleus and claustrum, the main and accessory olfactory bulb, the anterior and posterior olfactory nuclei, the precommisural hippocampus, the taenia tecta, the nucleus accumbens, the stria terminalis, the caudate putamen, the olfactory tubercle and islands of Calleja, septum, globus pallidus and substantia innominata, hippocampus and amygdala. In the diencephalon, the immunoreactivity was largely found in both the hypothalamus and thalamus. In the hypothalamus, immunoreactive cell bodies were characteristically located in the perivascular-neurosecretory systems and mamillary bodies. In addition, immunoreactive nerve fibres were detected in the median eminence of the infundibular stem. The mesencephalon showed nitric oxide synthase immunoreactivity in the ventral tegmental area, the interpeduncular nucleus, the rostral linear nucleus of the raphe and the dorsal raphe nucleus. Immunoreactive structures were also found in the nuclei of the central grey, the peripeduncular nucleus and substantia nigra pars lateralis, the geniculate nucleus and in the superior and inferior colliculi. The pons displayed immunoreactive structures principally in the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei, the ventral tegmental nucleus, the reticulotegmental pontine nucleus, the parabrachial nucleus and locus coeruleus. In the medulla oblongata, immunoreactive neurons and processes were detected in the principal sensory trigeminal nucleus, the trapezoid body, the raphe magnus, the pontine reticular nuclei, the supragenual nucleus, the prepositus hypoglossal nucleus, the medial and spinal vestibular nuclei, the dorsal cochlear nucleus, the medullary reticular field, the nucleus of the solitary tract, the gracile and cuneate nuclei, the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve and the oral, interpolar and caudal parts of the spinal trigeminal nucleus. In the cerebellum, the stellate and basket cells showed immunoreactivity, which was also seen in the basket terminal fibres of the Purkinje cell layer. Isolated immunoreactive Purkinje cells were found in the vermis and parafloccular regions of the cerebellum. In the granular layer of the cerebellum, the granular cells and glomeruli were also immunoreactive. Numerous positive varicose nerve fibres and occasional neurons were also found in the lateral and interposed cerebellar nuclei.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)