1. The mean intracellular pH in area CA1 of rat hippocampal slices was monitored fluorescently after loading the cells with the dye BCECF-AM. 2. Including L-glutamate in the solution superfusing the slice led to the intracellular pH becoming more acid. This acidification had a roughly Michaelis-Menten dependence on the superfused glutamate concentration with a half-maximal dose around 200 microM: this value must overestimate the glutamate concentration at most of the cells, which will be reduced by uptake. 3. The glutamate-evoked acidification was not significantly reduced by blockers of glutamate-gated ion channels [6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3- dione (CNQX) and D-aminophosphonovalerate (APV)] nor by blockers of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)- and glycine-gated channels (picrotoxin and strychnine), and so was not produced by H+ entry through alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4- isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) or N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor channels nor by HCO3- exit through the chloride channels controlled by GABA or glycine. 4. The glutamate-evoked acidification was not reduced by tetrodotoxin (TTX), ruling out the possibility of it being generated by action potentials. It was also unaffected by saturation of presynaptic L-amino-4-phosphonobutanoate (AP4) receptors with AP4. 5. In the presence of blockers of glutamate-, GABA-, and glycine-gated channels, the acidification showed the pharmacology of glutamate uptake and was reduced by a glutamate uptake blocker. 6. The glutamate-evoked acidification showed an ion dependence similar to that of glutamate uptake. It was abolished by removal of extracellular sodium and was reduced by raising the extracellular potassium concentration. It was unaffected by blockers of Na+/H+ exchange (amiloride) and Na+/HCO3- cotransport [4,4'-diisothiocyanostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid (DIDS)] and so was not produced by the Na+ influx accompanying glutamate uptake changing the activity of these carriers. 7. These data show that the glutamate uptake carrier acidifies hippocampal cells, possibly because it transports a pH-changing anion out of the cell as in salamander glial cells. Glutamate uptake may thus contribute to activity-induced pH changes in the nervous system.