Nitric oxide can act as a neurotransmitter and a retrograde modulator of synaptic transmission, but uncontrolled nitric oxide synthase activity has been associated with neural degeneration. Although earlier studies using immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and NADPH-diaphorase staining had suggested that nitric oxide synthase is not expressed in the CA1 neurons of the hippocampus, we have recently demonstrated that NADPH-diaphorase activity can be detected in CA1 neurons of the hippocampus. To confirm that this diaphorase activity reflects nitric oxide synthase, we have developed a more sensitive in situ hybridization procedure, and an RNase protection assay to detect message for constitutive nitric oxide synthase, the form constitutively expressed in many neurons. Message for constitutive nitric oxide synthase is expressed in the hippocampus, and it is localized to neural cell layers CA1, CA3, the dentate gyrus and some displaced neurons, but not to CA2. Expression of constitutive nitric oxide synthase message in the CA1 region was lost when pyramidal neurons died due to transient forebrain ischemia, supporting the conclusion that CA1 pyramidal cells express constitutive nitric oxide synthase. Although constitutive nitric oxide synthase message is strongly expressed in CA3 and the dentate gyrus, there is little diaphorase activity in these cells, suggesting that there may be post-transcriptional controls that limit constitutive nitric oxide synthase expression in some cells. Message for constitutive nitric oxide synthase is also present in a number of other regions, including the amygdala, several hypothalamic nuclei, the cerebellum, the olfactory bulb, two distinct regions of the perirhinal cortex, the subthalamic nuclei, a neuronal layer in the retrosplenial granular cortex, the lateral geniculate nucleus, the presubiculum, the inferior colliculus, the superior colliculus, the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus, and scattered individual neurons in the cortex, hippocampus and brainstem. These studies support a role for nitric oxide in multiple regions of the central nervous system. In particular, nitric oxide synthase, the enzyme responsible for the synthesis of nitric oxide, is expressed in the CA1 region of the hippocampus, where there is evidence that nitric oxide may play a major role in long-term potentiation. CA1 hippocampal neurons are an example of a population of neurons that express constitutive nitric oxide synthase but are very sensitive to excitotoxicity and ischemic insults.