Previous work using homogenate binding has shown that the development of (+)-5-methyl-10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[a,d]-cyclohepten-5,10imin e maleate (MK-801) binding in cat visual cortex increases from 21 days to 42 days, the height of the plastic period, and decreases in adulthood. We have studied the generality of this finding by examining the development of NMDA binding sites in several brain regions and by examining the development of other binding sites in the visual cortex. After confirming the original finding, we extended it by showing that the sensitivity of MK-801 binding sites to glutamate and glycine decreases when the cat becomes an adult. We then examined the regional specificity of MK-801 binding. Retinal binding did not change significantly with age. Binding in both visual cortex and hippocampus increased significantly from 7 days to 42 days regardless of whether binding was measured per milligram wet weight or per milligram protein. The decline from 42 days to adulthood was less dramatic in the hippocampus than in the visual cortex and was statistically significant only when binding was measured per milligram protein. Saturation analyses also showed a difference in the two structures. Bmax in the visual cortex, but not in the hippocampus, decreased from 42 days to adulthood. To determine whether these developmental changes were specific to MK-801 binding sites, we compared the age-dependent binding of MK-801, kainate, alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA), and muscimol. Like MK-801, kainate binding increased from 7 days to 42 days and decreased from 42 days to adulthood. AMPA and muscimol binding showed a similar increase in binding from 7 days to 42 days but did not decrease significantly from 42 days to adulthood. Displacement experiments suggest that AMPA and kainate bind to separate sites. The 42-day peak in NMDA and kainate binding suggests that their associated receptors may have a role in determining the plastic period of visual cortex.