We have analysed by northern blotting and by in situ hybridization the expression patterns of eight different genes during the second half of mouse embryonic development and in adult mouse brain: we compared the messenger RNA levels of amyloid precursor protein and of the two amyloid precursor protein-like proteins 1 and 2 and we have analysed expression of apolipoprotein E and of its main receptor in brain, the alpha-2-macroglobulin/low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein and three other ligands: the proteinase inhibitor alpha-2-macroglobulin, the modifying enzyme lipoprotein lipase and the 44,000 molecular weight heparin binding protein, a ligand of unknown function. During embryogenesis the temporal expression pattern differs considerably for the three members of the amyloid precursor proteins. Total embryo messenger RNA levels of amyloid precursor protein and amyloid precursor protein-like protein 2 increased progressively, while amyloid precursor protein-like protein 1 messenger RNA showed a burst of synthesis between days 10 and 13 post-coitum. Significantly, expression of the alpha-2-macroglobulin/low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein and of its associated protein, the 44,000 molecular weight heparin binding protein, exhibited their most important increase very similar to that of amyloid precursor protein-like protein 1, between days 10 and 13 post-coitum. Apolipoprotein E, lipoprotein lipase and alpha-2-macroglobulin messenger RNA levels in total embryos increased progressively, beginning most pronounced at days 13, 15 and 17, respectively. In mouse embryos, in situ hybridization established amyloid precursor protein, amyloid precursor protein-like protein 2 and alpha-2-macroglobulin/low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein messenger RNA to be expressed in most organs, with the notable exception of the liver, while expression of the other studied proteins was much more restricted. Among adult mouse tissues, the genes investigated were expressed very prominently in brain, except for lipoprotein lipase and for the complete absence of alpha-2-macroglobulin messenger RNA. In adult mouse brain, the cortex and hippocampus exhibited strong signals for most genes analysed. Exceptions are lipoprotein lipase and apolipoprotein E messenger RNAs, and the absent alpha-2-macroglobulin messenger RNA. Several interesting features, similarities as well as differences, between brain tissue sections hybridized with probes for amyloid precursor protein, amyloid precursor protein-like proteins 1 and 2 and between alpha-2-macroglobulin/low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein and heparin binding protein-44 were observed and are described. The results are further discussed in view of the known or anticipated physiological functions of the proteins examined and of their possible role in the etiology of Alzheimer's disease.