The developmental changes in alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate (AMPA) receptor properties in rat hippocampus were evaluated with quantitative autoradiography of ligand binding and in situ hybridization performed in adjacent sections with antisense oligonucleotides for AMPA receptor subunits (GluR1-3, flip and flop splice variants). Specific 3H-AMPA binding in different hippocampal subfields increased between postnatal day 7 and 15 and was higher in CA3 during the postnatal period when compared to adult levels. This effect was mostly due to high levels of high affinity binding sites in cell body layers during the developmental period. By contrast, autoradiograms of 3H-AMPA binding predominantly to the low affinity binding sites indicated an absence of these sites in cell body layers and the overall levels of binding exhibited little overshoot compared to adult levels during the developmental period. The changes in binding of the antagonist of the AMPA receptor, 6-nitro-7-cyanoquinoxaline-2,3-dione were markedly different from those for the high affinity AMPA binding sites but quite similar to those for the low affinity sites. The binding was extremely low at postnatal day 7 and increased rapidly between postnatal day 7 and 15 and slowly between postnatal day 15 and adult. Low levels of binding were observed in the cell body layer at every postnatal age. The changes in expression of messenger RNAs for the different subunits of the AMPA receptors were well correlated with the modifications in high affinity AMPA binding sites measured in the cell body layers also exhibiting an increased expression of the receptors at the transcriptional level during the developmental period as compared to adult levels. The relative expression of the GluR2 subunits decreased during the postnatal period and the time course for this reduction paralleled that for the increased vulnerability of hippocampal pyramidal neurons to a variety of insults. The results indicate that both the messenger RNAs for the subunits and the AMPA receptors exhibit increased levels of expression during the postnatal period compared to adult levels. They also suggest that nascent receptors might bind AMPA with high affinity before their insertion in membranes into functional receptors that have low affinity for agonists and high affinity for antagonists. The changes in subunit composition of the receptors during the postnatal period may have important implications for mechanisms of plasticity as well as of neuropathology.