In temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) lesion patients the pathology, location of intracranial ictal EEG onsets, and hippocampal neuron losses were compared. Patients (n = 63) were classified into: (1) Tumors (n = 26, e.g. astrocytomas, gangliogliomas); (2) vascular (n = 9, e.g. cavernous and venous angiomas); (3) developmental (n = 17, e.g. cortical dysplasia, heterotopias); or (4) atrophic (n = 11, e.g. cortical or white matter encephalomalacia). Other variables were; (1) the location of the temporal lesion in the mesial to lateral, and anterior to posterior plane, (2) a clinical history of an initial precipitating injury (IPI) prior to the onset of TLE (e.g. prolonged first seizure, head trauma), (3) hippocampal neuron densities, (4) focal or regional location by intracranial depth EEG of ictal onsets, and (5) seizure outcomes. Results showed that severe hippocampal neuron losses were associated with two statistically significant findings. First, patients with mesial lesions in or adjacent to the body of the hippocampus had greater neuron losses compared to mesial lesions anterior or posterior to the hippocampus (P = 0.04). Second, lesion patients with an IPI history had greater Ammon's horn (AH) neuron losses compared to those without IPI histories (P = 0.0005), and the profile of loss was similar to hippocampal sclerosis (HS). Granule cell losses correlated in a complex manner in that; 1) by regression analysis densities decreased with longer intervals of TLE (P = 0.006), (2) tumor patients with IPIs had less granule cell loss compared to those without IPIs intervals of TLE (P = 0.006), (2) tumor patients with IPIs had less granule cell loss compared to those without IPIs (P = 0.05), and (3) developmental patients with IPIs had greater granule cell loss than patients without IPIs (P = 0.009). Mesial-temporal depth EEG electrodes were the first areas of ictal activity in 15 of 16 patients (94%), and greater hippocampal neuron losses were not associated with focal mesial-temporal EEG onsets. Seizure outcomes were worse in tumor patients compared to HS patients (P = 0.01), and patients with post-resection seizures had incomplete resections of their lesions and/or hippocampi. These results indicate that in TLE lesion patients the amount and pattern of hippocampal neuron loss depends on the location of the lesion, the pathologic classification, and a history of an IPI. Further, despite variable neuron losses, in temporal lesion patients the hippocampus was nearly always involved in the genesis or propagation of the chronic seizures.