The concentrations and biochemical properties of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in the brains of two highly inbred strains of mice, DBA/2J and C57BL/6J, have been studied using [3H]quinuclidinyl benzilate (QNB), a potent and specific receptor antagonist. As is the case with rat brain, murine muscarinic receptors exist in at least two forms, which differ in their affinities for receptor agonists but which have the same high affinity for receptor antagonists. Carbamylcholine binding to mouse neural membranes can be resolved into two components with KDs of 5.2 times 10(-7) and 7.9 times 10(-5) M. There is a regional heterogeneity of brain receptors with respect to their distribution between these high and low agonist affinity forms. Brain stem and hypothalamus receptors display binding properties that would be expected if over 60% of their receptors were in the high affinity state, while only 30-40% of cortex, striatum and thalamus receptors appear to be in the high affinity form. Hippocampal receptors display the least amount of high agonist affinity character. Saturation curves and Scatchard plots of QNB binding at 2, 14, 21 and 42 days postnatal age in both strains indicate no differences or changes in the affinity or nature of the binding with age. Significant increases in QNB binding per mg membrane protein were observed between 14 and 42 days in the cortex, hippocampus, striatum, thalamus and hypothalamus, but not in the midbrain-pons-medulla region. In the hippocampus the DBA mice had significantly more QNB binding. In the hypothalamus decreases with age in total binding were noted in DBA, while slight increases were noted in C57. Compared to C57, hippocampal receptors in DBA displayed lower agonist affinity at 14 and 21 days, a trait which was not apparent when DBA had outgrown their audiogenic seizure sensitivity at 42 days. The differences in receptor density and agonist state distribution between the two strains may be related to audiogenic seizure sensitivity.