Oral administration of the benzodiazepine, flurazepam, for one week results in tolerance in vivo and in vitro and in a reduction in recurrent and feedforward inhibition in vitro in the CA1 pyramidal cell region of hippocampus. In the present study CA1 pyramidal cells were examined intracellularly in vitro in rat hippocampal slices (500 microns) from rats sacrificed two or seven days after cessation of oral flurazepam treatment. Following drug treatment, the membrane characteristics of CA1 pyramidal cells were not significantly different from control neurons. GABAA-mediated, early inhibitory postsynaptic potentials were significantly reduced in amplitude (60%) in pyramidal neurons from rats killed two days, but not in those killed seven days, after the end of drug administration. The decrease in early inhibitory postsynaptic potential amplitude was observed using just-subthreshold, threshold and supramaximal orthodromic stimulation as well as following antidromic activation. The magnitude of the decrease in the early inhibitory postsynaptic potential amplitude was similar in the presence of the GABAB antagonist, CGP 35348, and could not be attributed to differences in the strength of afferent stimulation between flurazepam-treated and control groups. The size of the GABAB-mediated, late inhibitory postsynaptic potentials was also significantly decreased (45%) in comparison to control cells. Reversal potentials for both the early (-72 mV) and late (-92 mV) hyperpolarizations were not significantly different between groups. Following high intensity orthodromic stimulation, in the presence of an intracellular sodium channel blocker (QX-314) which also blocks the GABAB-mediated late hyperpolarization, a bicuculline-sensitive late depolarizing potential was unmasked in neurons from FZP-treated rats, but never from control cells. Excitatory postsynaptic potential amplitude was significantly increased in flurazepam-treated neurons and the threshold for the synaptically-evoked action potential was significantly increased. Following depolarizing current injection, the duration and frequency of pyramidal cell discharges and the action potential threshold were not altered by oral flurazepam treatment. The amplitude of the fast afterhyperpolarization was also not changed. Overall, the findings indicate an impairment of transmission at GABAergic synapses onto hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cell neurons after chronic benzodiazepine treatment at a time when rats are tolerant to the anticonvulsant effects of the benzodiazepines in vivo.