Hexokinase I (ATP:D-hexose 6-phosphotransferase, EC 2.7.1.1) is the first enzyme required in the metabolism of glucose in the central nervous system and plays a major role in regulation of the cerebral glycolytic rate. The distribution of hexokinase I mRNA was examined throughout the central nervous system of the rat by use of oligonucleotide probes and in situ hybridization histochemistry. In the rhinencephalon, strong hexokinase I mRNA labeling was demonstrated in the glomerular, mitral, internal granular, and internal plexiform layers, whereas the olfactory nerve, external plexiform, and subependymal layers and ependyma were devoid of labeling. Within the telencephalon, strong labeling was present in all layers (with the exception of the molecular layer) of the cerebral cortex, in the septum, in CA1-4 and dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, and in several amygdaloid nuclei. There was only weak labeling in the nucleus accumbens and caudate putamen. In the diencephalon, there was in general a strong labeling in the epithalamus, in several thalamic nuclei, including the anteriodorsal, anterioventral, anteriomedial, reticular, paravetricular, intermediodorsal, anteriomedial, interanteriomedial, rhomboid, reuniens, and parafascicular thalamic nuclei. Several hypothalamic regions, including the subfornical organ, the medial preoptic area, the suprachiasmatic, supraoptic, paraventricular, dorsomedial, ventromedial nuclei, and the zona incerta, were strongly labeled. In the mesencephalon, there was particularly strong labeling in the pars compacta and reticulata of the substantia nigra, central gray, and red nucleus, in the Darkschewitsch nucleus, and in the medial accessory oculomotor nucleus. In the rhombencephalon, there was strong hybridization in all raphe nuclei, pontine, tegmental, lateral parabrachial, olivary nuclei, and several cranial motor nuclei. All neurons of the locus ceruleus were heavily labeled. Very strong labeling was present in Purkinje and granular cells of the cerebellar cortex. Neurons of the medulla oblongata area postrema, nucleus tractus solitarius, reticular nucleus, nucleus cuneatus and several motor nuclei were strongly labeled. In the spinal cord, labeled cells were present in all laminae, and also neurons of the dorsal root ganglion were heavily labeled. Hexokinase I mRNA was also demonstrated in the epithelium lining the the choroid plexus. In the E15 fetus, very strong labeling was seen in the liver, heart, and trigeminal ganglion, with less intense labeling in in the brain and other tissues having more moderate labeling. Administration of 2% saline as drinking water resulted in a marked increase in hexokinase I mRNA in the magnocellular neurons of the supraoptics and paraventricular nuclei. In summary, the results show extensive neuronal distribution of hexokinase I mRNA with regional differences in the expression pattern.