Statin is a 57-kDa protein exclusively expressed in nuclei of nonproliferating mammalian cells. Recent studies have suggested that statin may play a role in the maintenance of growth arrest. Several lines of evidence also support the notion that a variety of genes and gene products are modulated during cell proliferation and cell death. The present study examined the possibility that statin expression could be modulated during neuronal injury using N-methyl-Daspartate (NMDA)-induced toxicity to rat embryonic hippocampal cultures as a model. Immunocytochemical studies using a monoclonal antibody to statin revealed a prominent nuclear localization of statin in cultured hippocampal cells. Western blot analysis showed that this antibody recognizes a 57-kDa protein band, indicative of the presence of statin in this preparation. Brief exposure of hippocampal neurons to NMDA (500 microM) produced severe neuronal degeneration over the subsequent hours. NMDA-treated neurons markedly overexpressed statin. Both NMDA-induced neuronal toxicity and statin overexpression were prevented by the NMDA receptor antagonist (+)-5-methyl-10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo [a,d] cyclohept-5,10-imine hydrogen maleate (MK-801). Interestingly, time course studies indicate that the increased expression of statin observed following NMDA exposure clearly preceded the appearance of the first signs of neuronal death as determined by vital staining. In addition, exposure of hippocampal neurons to the Ca2+ ionophore, A23187, produced a marked increase in statin immunodetection, indicating that statin expression is likely regulated in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner. Thus, these results show that statin, which is expressed at low levels in embryonic rat cultured hippocampal neurons, is rapidly overexpressed following a toxic insult produced by the activation of the NMDA receptor. The observation that statin overexpression occurs prior to neuronal death raises the possibility that the up-regulation of statin could be used as an early index of neuronal injury.