The effects of cerebral ischemia on calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaM kinase II) were investigated using the rat four-vessel occlusion model. In agreement with previous results using rat or gerbil models of cerebral ischemia or a rabbit model of spinal cord ischemia, this report demonstrates that transient forebrain ischemia leads to a reduction in CaM kinase II activity within 5 min of occlusion onset. Loss of activity from the cytosol fractions of homogenates from the neocortex, striatum, and hippocampus correlated with a decrease in the amount of CaM kinase alpha and beta isoforms detected by immunoblotting. In contrast, there was an apparent increase in the amount of CaM kinase alpha and beta in the particulate fractions. The decrease in the amount of CaM kinase isoforms from the cytosol but not the particulate fractions was confirmed by autophosphorylation of CaM kinase II after denaturation and renaturation in situ of the blotted proteins. These results indicate that ischemia causes a rapid inhibition of CaM kinase II activity and a change in the partitioning of the enzyme between the cytosol and particulate fractions. CaM kinase II is a multifunctional protein kinase, and the loss of activity may play a critical role in initiating the changes leading to ischemia-induced cell death. To identify a structural basis for the decrease in enzyme activity, tryptic peptide maps of CaM kinase II phosphorylated in vitro were compared. Phosphopeptide maps of CaM kinase alpha from particulate fractions of control and ischemic samples revealed not only reduced incorporation of phosphate into the protein but also the absence of a limited number of peptides in the ischemic samples. This suggested that certain sites are inaccessible, possibly due to a conformational change, a covalent modification of CaM kinase II, or steric hindrance by an associated molecule. Verifying one of these possibilities should help to elucidate the mechanism of ischemia-induced modulation of CaM kinase II.