Recent data suggest that gp120, a glycoprotein secreted by HIV-1-infected macrophages, is neurotoxic, and that toxicity is mediated, at least in part, by overactivation of NMDA-type excitatory amino acid receptors. In experimental animals, considerable evidence indicates that hypoglycemic and ischemic neuronal injury are mediated by endogenous excitatory amino acids. We hypothesized that in the presence of gp120 the severity of brain injury resulting from hypoglycemia and cerebral ischemia would increase. To test this hypothesis in vivo, we evaluated the influence of gp120 on the extent of brain injury resulting from these two clinically relevant pathophysiological insults in 7-day-old (P7) rats, the developmental stage of peak susceptibility to NMDA neurotoxicity. We compared the severity of hippocampal injury resulting from right intrahippocampal injections of gp120 (50 ng) in P7 rats rendered markedly hypoglycemic (n = 10) and in controls (n = 12). We also determined the influence of gp120 administration on the severity of hypoxic-ischemic injury, using a perinatal rat stroke model. P7 rats received intrahippocampal injections of gp120 (50 ng) (n = 23) or saline (n = 18) and then underwent right carotid ligation, followed by 2 h exposure to 8% oxygen. Brain injury was evaluated 5 days later, based on neuropathology evaluation and measurements of bilateral regional cross-sectional areas. The severity of hippocampal injury, based on cross-sectional area measurements, was considerably greater in animals from the hypoglycemic group than in litter-mate gp120-injected controls. Among the animals that underwent hypoxic-ischemic lesioning, the severity of injury, based on histopathology scoring and regional volume measurements, was considerably greater in animals that received gp120 than in those that received saline. These results provide support for the hypothesis that locally secreted HIV peptides, such as gp120, may potentiate the neurotoxicity of endogenous excitatory amino acid neurotransmitters in HIV-infected brain.