PURPOSE: To investigate the clinical significance of MR-defined asymmetry of the fornix and mamillary body for presurgical determination of the side of hippocampal sclerosis in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy. METHODS: Fast spin-echo MR images were evaluated for evidence of an asymmetrically small fornix and mamillary body in 33 patients with pathologically proved hippocampal sclerosis (presurgical hippocampal sclerosis group), 7 patients who had undergone anterior temporal lobectomy (mean, 3 years from surgery) because of hippocampal sclerosis (postsurgical hippocampal sclerosis group), and 34 healthy subjects (control group). Fast spin-echo hippocampal volumetry was performed in each patient. RESULTS: In the control group, 6% (2 of 34) of subjects had MR evidence of asymmetrically small fornix and none (0 of 34) of the subjects had asymmetrically small mamillary body. In the patient population, an asymmetrically small fornix was seen in 42% of presurgical hippocampal sclerosis group, 39% (13 of 33) ipsilateral, and 3% (1 of 33) contralateral, and in 71% of the postsurgical hippocampal sclerosis group (5 of 7), all ipsilateral. In the presurgical hippocampal sclerosis group, hippocampal atrophy measured with MR was more severe in patients with an ipsilaterally small fornix than in patients without. An asymmetrically small mamillary body was found ipsilaterally in 3% (1 of 33) of the presurgical hippocampal sclerosis group and in 57% (4 of 7) of the postsurgical hippocampal sclerosis group; all patients with an asymmetrically small mamillary body in the postsurgical hippocampal sclerosis group also had an asymmetrically small fornix on the same side. CONCLUSION: In presurgical hippocampal sclerosis patients, an asymmetrically small fornix can be seen ipsilaterally on the side of the hippocampal sclerosis; however, its low frequency, its association with severe hippocampal atrophy only, and the possibility of false-positive results limit its clinical usefulness in determining the side of the seizure focus. An asymmetrically small mamillary body is too rare to be used for presurgical location of hippocampal sclerosis. However, an asymmetrically small fornix and mamillary body are frequently seen on MR images after temporal lobectomy.