Previous studies in vitro indicate that basic fibroblast growth factor participates in the survival, proliferation and differentiation of immature neural cells, predicting that it may have the same types of roles in vivo. In order to evaluate a possible role of basic fibroblast growth factor in neural development, we have examined its localization in the rodent brain at critical stages of development. We characterized basic fibroblast growth factor immunoreactivity at embryonic days 13 and 18, and postnatal days 1, 4, 6, 10, 20 and 90. Our results showed that basic fibroblast growth factor was transiently expressed by different cellular phenotypes throughout development. At embryonic day 13, basic fibroblast growth factor immunoreactivity was sparsely distributed in various cell phenotypes. At embryonic day 18, the primitive cerebral cortex showed basic fibroblast growth factor immunoreactivity within its emerging laminar structure, including the cortical plate and subplate regions. At postnatal day 1, basic fibroblast growth factor immunoreactivity was mostly concentrated in the hippocampal subfields cornu Ammon 1, cornu Ammon 2 and cornu Ammon 3, and neurons of the medical septum and the vertical limb of the diagonal band nuclei. At postnatal days 4-6, astrocyte-like cells showed basic fibroblast growth factor immunoreactivity for the first time during development. At this stage, basic fibroblast growth factor in the hippocampus was mostly shown within subfields cornu Ammon 2 and cornu Ammon 1. In the medical septum, just a few neuronal profiles were weakly stained, and basic fibroblast growth factor positive astrocytes appeared to accumulate around these basic fibroblast growth factor-stained neurons. At postnatal day 20, the adult pattern of basic fibroblast growth factor immunoreactivity was fully established. Astrocytes throughout the brain expressed basic fibroblast growth factor, and neuronal basic fibroblast growth factor was restricted to particular populations such as cingulate cortex and hippocampus. The cornu Ammon 2 subfield was the main neuronal location for basic fibroblast growth factor in the mature hippocampus. Our results showed that the cellular location of basic fibroblast growth factor changes during development, suggesting that basic fibroblast growth factor has multiple and evolving roles during histogenesis and differentiation of the CNS.