Long-term potentiation induced by high-frequency stimulation in the CA1 region of the hippocampus exhibits EPSP-spike potentiation. This consists of an increase in population spike amplitude exceeding that predicted by EPSP potentiation alone. This phenomenon is apparently due to an increase in pyramidal cell excitability. Patterns of afferent stimuli which activate pyramidal cells to reproduce the theta rhythm observed in the hippocampus under physiological conditions, have been shown to induce LTP-like enhancement of synaptic responses in vitro. The aim of this study was to investigate the presence of EPSP-spike potentiation and/or changes in pyramidal cell excitability during the long-term potentiation induced in the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices by theta-like patterns of stimuli: the primed burst and the patterned stimulation. Using extracellular recording, a significant leftward shift in the EPSP-spike relationship was found 30 min after primed burst or patterned stimulation. The magnitude of EPSP-spike potentiation induced by patterned stimulation was similar to that produced by high-frequency stimulation. Both were significantly greater than that induced by a primed burst, indicating that only a subset of pyramidal cells were potentiated by this kind of afferent activation. Modifications in synaptic efficacy and cell excitability brought about by a primed burst were investigated in 25 intracellularly recorded pyramidal cells. Consistent with extracellular results, it was found that only 11 out of 25 neurons receiving a primed burst were potentiated. In these cells the increase in probability of firing action potentials elicited by synaptic activation with test shocks was accompanied by enhanced cell excitability, but not by an increase in EPSP slope. High-frequency stimulation delivered 40 min after a primed burst invariably increased the EPSP slope, the probability of firing upon synaptic stimulation, and the excitability of cells. The presence of EPSP-spike potentiation and of increased excitability of potentiated cells during the primed burst-induced long-term potentiation strengthen the suggestion that theta pattern-induced synaptic potentiation can be considered similar to high-frequency stimulation and long-term potentiation and supports the notion that the EPSP-spike potentiation is a constitutive characteristic of long-term potentiation.