Acetylcholine (ACh) is a powerful excitotoxic neurotransmitter in the brain. By stimulating Ca(2+)-mobilizing receptors, ACh, through G-protein(s), stimulates phospholipase C and causes the hydrolysis of a membrane phospholipid, phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate to two second messengers, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (ins-(1,4,5)-P3), and diacylglycerol. Ins-(1,4,5)-P3 is important in cholinergic neuronal stimulation, and injury. Cholinergic agonists cause tonic-clonic convulsions which may be either transient or persistent. Even short-term cholinergic convulsions may be associated with neuronal injury, especially in the basal forebrain and the hippocampus. Cholinergic-induced convulsions also elevate levels of brain Ca2+ which precede neuronal injury. Female sex and senescence increase the sensitivity of rats to cholinergic excitotoxicity. Even if cholinergic-induced brain phosphoinositide signalling is likely to trigger cholinergic excitotoxicity, several other processes may be involved in the ensuing neuronal injury. Once initiated, cholinergic convulsions cannot be stopped with cholinergic antagonists such as atropine even though they are effective when given prior to a cholinergic agonist. However, glutaminergic antagonists, and GABAergic agonists, are effective in the attenuation of ongoing cholinergic status epilepticus. Cholinergic brain stimulation may be, in fact, under a partial control of brain GABAergic tonus, but also cause the release of glutamate. Glutamate stimulates inositol lipid signalling in several neuronal cells and, therefore, underlines the significance of inositol lipid signalling in cholinergic-induced excitotoxicity. Moreover, the anatomical distribution of cholinergic brain damage correlates well with that of glutaminergic neurons. Furthermore, glutamate increases neuronal oxidative stress, i.e. it increases the levels of free intracellular calcium, the production of reactive oxygen species, and causes the depletion of neuronal glutathione. The role of excitatory amino acids as common mediators of cholinergic excitotoxicity may offer new insights into the neurotoxic consequences of cholinergic neuronal stimulation.