Long-term potentiation, a tetanic stimulation-evoked, persistent increase in synaptic efficiency, is the most extensively studied form of synaptic plasticity. Intracellular correlates of long-term potentiation have been analysed in mammalian hippocampus and cortex, but not in bird cortical analogues. We present here studies on long-term potentiation in slices of the chick forebrain area mediorostral neostriatum-hyperstriatum complex which receives thalamic afferents and is relevant for auditory filial imprinting. Following afferent tetanic stimulation, population spike potentiation was extracellularly recorded in 25% of the tested neurons for longer than 40 min. Using intracellular recordings, the membrane potential, the amplitude of excitatory postsynaptic potentials, the latency between the test stimulus and the evoked action potentials, and the cellular excitability (excitatory postsynaptic potential-spike relationship) were found to change after the tetanus. A long-term depression following the tetanus was also seen in some units in this area. Furthermore, the mechanisms underlying long-term potentiation were investigated. A large depolarization of resting membrane potential (approx. 36 mV) was characteristic after the tetanic stimulation. N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor channels are necessary for induction of this depolarization, as well as for long-term potentiation, as demonstrated by the effect of DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid. After intracellular recordings, the cells were injected with Lucifer Yellow. The combination of electrophysiological characterization and morphological identification suggested that the potentiation came chiefly from type I neurons, which have the largest soma among the neuron types in this area and up to eight dendrites. The results demonstrate that the recognized major phenomena of long-term potentiation are found in an auditory imprinting-relevant area of the chick forebrain, and that this potentiation is dependent on N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor channels. It is noteworthy that behavioural imprinting was previously shown to induce a reduction of up to 47% of the spine frequency of type I neurons and a growth of the remaining spine synapses, all resembling a synaptic selection process. Therefore, the intriguing possibility emerges that mechanisms underlying long-term potentiation are instrumental for this selection process, which involves regressive and proliferative morphological changes.