1. Steady-state iodothyronine profiles in plasma are composed of thyroid gland-synthesized hormones (mainly thyroxine) and tissue iodothyronine metabolites (mainly triiodothyronine and reverse triiodothyronine) that have entered the bloodstream. The hormones circulate in noncovalently bound complexes with a panoply of carrier proteins. Transthyretin (TTR), the major high-affinity thyroid hormone binding protein in rat plasma, is formed in the liver. It is also actively and independently synthesized in choroid plexus, where its function as a chaperone of thyroid hormones from bloodstream to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is undergoing close scrutiny by several groups of investigators. Because TTR has high-affinity binding sites for both thyroxine and retinol binding protein, its potential role as a mediator of combined thyroid hormone and retinoic acid availability in brain is of further interest. 2. While they are in the free state relative to their binding proteins, iodothyronines in the cerebral circulation are putatively subject to transport across both the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and choroid plexus CSF barrier (CSFB) before entering the brain. Previous autoradiographic studies had already indicated that after intravenous administration the transport mechanisms governing thyroxine and triiodothyronine entry into brain were probably similar, whereas those for reverse triiodothyronine were very different, although the basis for the difference was not established at that time. Intense labeling seen over brain ventricles after intravenous administration of all three iodothyronines suggested that all were subject to transport across the CSFB. 3. To evaluate the role of the BBB and CSFB in determining iodothyronine access to brain parenchyma, autoradiograms prepared after intravenous administration of [125I]-labeled hormones (revealing results of transport across both barriers) were compared with those prepared after intrathecal (icv) hormone injection (reflecting only their capacity to penetrate into the brain after successfully navigating the CSFB). 4. Those studies revealed that thyroxine and triiodothyronine were mainly transported across the BBB. They shared with reverse triiodothyronine a generally similar, limited pattern of penetration from CSF into the brain, with circumventricular organs likely to be the main recipients of iodothyronines (with or without retinol) transported across the CSFB. 5. Analysis of all of the images obtained after intravenous and icv hormone administration clarified the basis for the unique distribution of intravenously injected reverse triiodothyronine. The hormone is excluded by the BBB but may be subject to limited penetration into brain parenchyma via the CSF. 6. Overall the observations single out reverse triiodothyronine as the iodothyronine showing the most distinctive as well as the most limited pattern of transport from blood to brain.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)