Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) activate both the immune and the stress response system. The effects of these bacterial endotoxins involve the release of interleukin 1 (IL1) and other cytokines, which in turn stimulate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. We studied the binding properties of the corticosteroid receptor system, which mediates feedback inhibition of the HPA axis, in two brain areas and in the pituitary gland in rats treated with LPS and recombinant murine IL1 beta. The binding properties of the corticosteroid receptors were determined by Scatchard plot analyses of in vitro cytosolic binding of the tritiated mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) radioligand aldosterone and the tritiated glucocorticoid receptor (GR) ligand RU28362. Tissues were collected 48 h after administration of LPS, including a 24-hour period for depletion of endogenous corticosterone. LPS treatment increased the Kd of [3H]aldosterone of the hippocampal MR 4.3-fold and the apparent maximum binding capacity (Bmax) of [3H]aldosterone by 65% during a time interval when the concentration of corticosterone, the endogenous ligand of both hippocampal MR and GR, was elevated in the intact rat. Thereafter, MR binding properties were not different from vehicle-injected controls, at 96 h, when in intact animals the enhanced HPA activity subsided. GRs, determined by binding of [3H]RU28362, were not affected by LPS. IL1 evoked a 2.7-fold increase in the Kd of the hippocampal MR and a 57% increase in Bmax 3 h after injection into the lateral cerebral ventricle. An autoradiographic procedure revealed that the same treatment with IL1 reduced the retention of the tritiated endogenous MR ligand corticosterone by 40-60% in all pyramidal cell layers and in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, when a tracer dose of the steroid was administered that gives rise to a concentration around the Kd of the MR. This reduced in vivo retention of corticosterone is predicted in view of the reduced affinity of hippocampal MRs. The data are consistent with the hypothesis that an impaired feedback of the HPA axis via deficient hippocampal MRs contributes to stimulate corticosterone secretion from the adrenals during infection.