PURPOSE: To determine the frequency of appearance of various MR signs in mesial temporal sclerosis, to determine the optimal scanning planes for their visualization, and to propose a histologic explanation for the diminished demarcation between gray and white matter in the temporal lobe, a frequent MR finding in patients with mesial temporal sclerosis. METHODS: MR scans of 14 surgically treated patients with epilepsy and histologically proven mesial temporal sclerosis were assessed for the presence of six features: feature 1, high signal intensity in the hippocampus; 2, reduced hippocampal size; 3, ipsilateral atrophy of the hippocampal collateral white matter; 4, enlarged temporal horn; 5, reduced gray-white matter demarcation in the temporal lobe; and 6, decreased temporal lobe size. RESULTS: Feature 1 was present in 14 patients and was best appreciated on the T2-weighted images in planes parallel to the long axes of the hippocampi. Feature 2, present in 12 patients, and feature 6, present in 9 patients, were optimally seen in the coronal planes and on the inversion-recovery sequences in particular. Feature 3, present in 12 patients, was optimally seen on the coronal T2-weighted images. Feature 4, seen in 11 patients, was equally well seen in all planes (transverse, coronal, and parallel to the long axes of the hippocampi). Feature 5, seen in 10 patients, was best appreciated on the T2-weighted images in the planes of the long axes of the hippocampi. Histologic investigation of the temporal lobe white matter in the 10 patients with feature 5 demonstrated on the MR scan showed abnormalities in 7 cases. Oligodendroglia cell clusters were found in 6, with concomitant corpora amylacea in 1 case and perivascular macrophages with pigment a sole finding in another case. CONCLUSION: Of the six features found in cases of mesial temporal sclerosis on MR, increased hippocampal signal intensity is the most consistent. A decreased gray-white matter demarcation in the temporal lobe parenchyma is also a frequent feature of this disease. A combination of multiple scanning planes results in an optimal demonstration of lesions.