The effect of postnatal age on phosphoinositide metabolism per se and on quisqualate-stimulated phosphoinositide metabolism was characterized in synaptoneurosomes prepared from nine different regions of the rat nervous system, namely the brainstem, cerebellum, cerebral cortex, colliculi, hippocampus, hypothalamus, olfactory bulb, spinal cord and striatum. In the hippocampus, striatum, cerebellum, cerebral cortex, brainstem, colliculus and spinal cord, the basal levels of inositol phosphate (inositol-1-phosphate+inositol-4,5-bisphosphate) formation were maximal two days after birth and declined steeply to steady-state levels from the age of 10 postnatal days. Similarly, in the olfactory bulb, basal inositol phosphate synthesis did not significantly change when measured during the period from postnatal day 10 to 42. The extent of [3H]-inositol labelling of phosphoinositides as a function of age presented similar profiles when measured in hippocampal, striatal, cerebellar and cerebral cortical synaptoneurosomes, i.e. maximal at perinatal ages and minimal at adult ages. In the hypothalamus, [3H]-inositol labelling of phosphoinositides showed an increase from postnatal day 12 to higher levels from postnatal days 14 to 18 subsequently followed by a dramatic increase from postnatal day 21 to 42. A similar developmental trend was also obtained for basal inositol phosphate synthesis. On the whole, four types of developmental profiles for quisqualate-stimulated inositol phosphate formation (expressed as the percentage of the basal level and as the difference between stimulated and basal levels of radioactive inositol phosphates) were obtained depending on the nervous system region studied. In the early, prenatally developed nervous system regions, namely the brainstem and the spinal cord, no postnatal stimulation peaks of quisqualate-induced inositol phosphate formation were recorded. This was also the case for the colliculi when the stimulation of IP formation was expressed as the difference in basal and stimulated levels of inositol phosphates. Secondly, in the olfactory bulb a region known to possess a continuous capacity for developmental plasticity both structurally and functionally during the first three weeks of postnatal development, a simultaneous sustained high level of quisqualate stimulation of phosphoinositide metabolism (fluctuating around 200% of the basal level) during the early postnatal period was evident. Thirdly, in regions of the central nervous system like the cerebellum, cerebral cortex, hippocampus and the striatum known to undergo intense developmental activity during the first two postnatal weeks, peaks of quisqualate-stimulated phosphoinositide metabolism were initially detected around the first week after birth in each of these brain areas.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)