1. The sites of origin of spontaneous interictal-like epileptiform activity in hippocampal slices from guinea pig, mouse, and rat were determined. A multisite fast optical recording technique using voltage-sensitive dyes and an array of 100 photodiodes was employed. The use of a low-magnification objective lens allowed the visualization of almost the entire transverse hippocampal slice. Three in vitro models of epilepsy were employed, utilizing different manipulations of the bath perfusion medium to induce epileptiform activity: 1) raising the external potassium (K+) concentration, 2) adding the potassium channel blocker 4-aminopyridine (4-AP), and 3) adding antagonists of gamma-aminobutyric acid-A (GABAA) receptors (bicuculline and picrotoxin, BIC-PTX). 2. Spontaneous epileptiform discharges were detected in each subfield of cornu ammonis (CA) but not in the dentate gyrus (DG) of each studied species. Preliminary experiments confirmed that interictal-like epileptiform activity originated in the CA2-CA3 region. Ictal-like activity was never observed in our experiments. 3. In the guinea pig, when GABAA antagonists were employed, the site of origin of spontaneous epileptiform discharges was consistently located in the CA2-CA3a region. When high K+ or 4-AP was used, this region was the most frequent site of origin. Subsequent epileptiform discharges with similar sites of origin occasionally invaded different areas of the CA2-CA3 region, revealing a variable area of occupance of epileptiform discharges. 4. In the mouse and rat, the site of origin of spontaneous discharges was invariably located in the CA3b-CA3c region independent of the epilepsy model. 5. In both the guinea pig and rat, when the CA2-CA3a region was surgically separated from the CA3b-CA3c region, independent discharges were observed in both regions. Areas that could generate discharges only under certain epileptogenic conditions were found in these species (potential sites of origin). Two independent sites of origin with different propagation patterns and area of occupance were occasionally observed within the CA2-CA3a region. 6. In the guinea pig, such lesions demonstrated that both regions can independently generate epileptiform discharges at different frequencies. When high K+ or 4-AP was employed, epileptiform activity was observed in both regions. Although BIC-PTX only generated discharges in the CA2-CA3a region, a subsequent increase in K+ induced additional discharges in the CA3b-CA3c region, revealing a potential site of origin. 7. In rat hippocampal slices with such lesions, spontaneous epileptiform discharges were observed in both CA2-CA3a and CA3b-CA3c region when 4-AP was employed.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)