Brain activity patterns during echolocation and flight were assessed in mustached bats (Pteronotus parnellii parnellii). Bats were injected intraperitoneally with [3H]2-deoxyglucose and restrained in a foam holder or allowed to fly for 20 min. Under resting conditions, low levels of [3H]2-deoxyglucose uptake were observed throughout the forebrain but relatively high uptake was found in brainstem auditory and vestibular centers. In flying, echolocating bats, marked increases in regional [3H]2-deoxyglucose uptake were apparent. All structures of the classical ascending auditory pathway were intensely labeled in autoradiograms. Other brain regions that exhibited high [3H]2-deoxyglucose uptake in flying bats included the cingulate cortex, stratum lacunosum-moleculare of the hippocampus, thalamus, caudate-putamen, superior colliculus, pontine reticular formation, nucleus ambiguus, parts of the midbrain central gray, and cerebellum. In the cerebellum, the most prominent increase in [3H]2-deoxyglucose uptake was found in discrete patches of the granule cell layer. The results provide the first overview of brain activity patterns during echolocation and flight in bats. In addition, uptake of [14C]fluorodeoxyglucose was used to compare brain activity patterns in flying bats to bats that were imaging their environment via biosonar while hanging in a wire cage. The echolocating-not-flying bats emitted 6931 +/- 1226 pulses in 20 min compared to 8972 +/- 1273 pulses in 20 min for flying bats. The uptake of the metabolic marker was significantly more in the flying bats compared to the emitting-not-flying bats in the medial geniculate, superior colliculus, auditory cortex, cingulate cortex and thalamus. In the nucleus ambiguus, cochlear nucleus, and inferior colliculus, uptake was similar for the flying and emitting-not-flying bats. These results suggest that the high metabolic activity observed in forebrain auditory regions of flying bats is related in part to neural processes that involve sensory motor integration during flight and not simply the perception of acoustic information.