1. Whole-cell recordings have been made from interneurons located in stratum pyramidale in the CA1 region of the hippocampus. The responses of these interneurons to brief current pulses were recorded; the neurons were filled with biocytin and their morphology was reconstructed. 2. The interneurons were identified as basket cells on the basis of the regional distribution of their axon collateral network and their location in stratum pyramidale. 3. A compartmental model of the reconstructed neuron was made, and the specific membrane resistivity (Rm), specific cytoplasmic resistivity (Ri), and somatic shunt leakage resistance (Rs) determined by adjusting these parameters until an optimal fit was obtained between the compartmental model's current pulse response and the recorded current pulse response of the neuron. 4. This procedure was successful for six neurons, giving Rm from 7 to 66 k omega cm2, Ri from 52 to 484 omega cm, and Rs from 84 M omega to infinity. The specific membrane capacitance was assumed to be 1 microF/cm2. The electrotonic length of the apical dendrites was 1.06 +/- 0.4, and for the basal dendrites it was 0.51 +/- 0.26 (mean +/- SD). 5. Although the total surface area of the interneurons and the physical length of their dendrites was much smaller than for CA1 pyramidal neurons, their electrotonic profiles were similar. Neurons with small physical profiles cannot be assumed to be more electrotonically compact than larger neurons, especially if the dendrites of the smaller neurons have a proportional reduction in diameter. 6. Two neurons did not require a somatic leakage conductance in their electrical representation. This suggests that when a somatic leakage conductance is required, it is an artifact resulting from electrode damage, rather than a requirement caused by a lower resistivity of the somatic membrane compared with the dendritic membrane. 7. Simulations of synaptic currents evoked in the dendrites of these interneurons while the soma is voltage clamped indicate large errors will occur in the time course measurements and amplitude of these currents. Also the ratio of N-methyl-D-aspartate:alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (NMDA:AMPA) currents at these synapses calculated from currents recorded at the soma will be in error because of the differential attenuation of the faster AMPA currents compared with the NMDA currents.