The effects on the hippocampal electroencephalogram of microinjections of procaine hydrochloride and the serotonin1A agonists, 8-OH-DPAT and buspirone, into the median raphe nucleus were examined in the urethane anesthetized rat. Injections of procaine, 8-OH-DPAT or buspirone into the median raphe nucleus produced a change in the hippocampal electroencephalogram from a spontaneous desynchronized pattern to a synchronized pattern (theta rhythm) within short latencies and for long durations post-injection. Procaine was shown to elicit theta at a mean latency of 52 s and for a mean duration of 21.75 min; buspirone at a mean latency of 2 min and for a mean duration of 34.5 min. A dose dependent relationship was observed between 8-OH-DPAT injections and latencies but not durations. Small doses (0.5 micrograms) of 8-OH-DPAT produced theta at a mean latency of 1.33 min and large doses (3.0 micrograms) at a mean latency of 1.17 min. 8-OH-DPAT injections generated theta for a mean duration of 62 min. Injections of each of these substances into structures dorsal, lateral or rostrocaudal to the median raphe (dorsal raphe nucleus, pontine reticular formation, caudal linear nucleus or raphe pontis, respectively) failed to generate theta or in a few cases produced theta at very long latencies (> 24 min). Saline injections in the median raphe nucleus or control structures were without effect. The demonstration that agents injected into the median raphe nucleus that inhibit its activity (procaine and serotonin1A agonists) produce theta indicate that serotonin-containing median raphe neurons normally suppress theta or are involved in the control of hippocampal desynchronization. The present findings are consistent with previous work showing that median raphe nucleus stimulation desynchronizes the hippocampal electroencephalogram and that median raphe nucleus lesions produce constant theta, but are at odds with the proposal that serotonergic mechanisms may play a role in the generation of the theta rhythm.