To examine the mechanisms underlying chronic epileptiform activity, field potentials were first recorded to identify hyperexcitable hippocampal slices from kainic acid-treated rats. Intracellular recordings were then obtained from CA1 pyramidal cells in the hyperexcitable areas. Twenty-two of the 47 cells responded to electrical stimulation of the stratum radiatum with a burst of two or more action potentials and reduced early inhibitory postsynaptic potentials, and were considered hyperexcitable. The remaining 25 cells were not hyperexcitable, displaying a single action potential and biphasic inhibitory postsynaptic potentials after stimulation, like control cells (n = 20). A long duration, voltage-sensitive component was associated with subthreshold excitatory postsynaptic potentials in the majority of hyperexcitable (12/15) and non-hyperexcitable (3/5) cells examined from kainic acid-treated animals, but not from cells (1/10) of control animals. Stimulation of stratum radiatum during pharmacological blockade of ionotropic excitatory amino acid synaptic transmission elicited biphasic monosynaptic inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in all hyperexcitable (n = 9) and non-hyperexcitable (n = 9) cells tested from kainate-treated animals, as well as in control cells (n = 8). The mean amplitude, latency to peak, equilibrium potential, and conductance changes of early and late monosynaptic inhibitory postsynaptic potentials were not different between cells of kainic acid-treated and control animals. In seven hyperexcitable cells tested, the early component of monosynaptic inhibitory postsynaptic potentials was significantly reduced by the GABAA receptor antagonist bicuculline (100-200 microM). The late component was significantly decreased by the GABAB receptor antagonist 2-hydroxysaclofen (1-2 mM; n = 3). Comparable effects were observed on early and late monosynaptic inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in non-hyperexcitable cells (n = 4) from kainic acid-treated animals and control cells (n = 5). These results suggest that GABAergic synapses on hyperexcitable hippocampal pyramidal cells of kainate-treated rats are intact and functional. Therefore, epileptiform activity in the kainate-lesioned hippocampus may not arise from a disconnection of GABAergic synapses made by inhibitory interneurons on pyramidal cells. The hyperexcitability may be due to underactivation of inhibitory interneurons and/or reorganization of excitatory inputs to pyramidal cells since, in kainate-treated animals, pyramidal cells appear to express additional excitatory mechanisms.