To examine the inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) elicited in pyramidal cells by interneurons situated at the stratum oriens/alveus border (O/A), glutamate was applied by micropressure to this area during intracellular recordings from CA1 pyramidal cells. Glutamate stimulation evoked IPSPs (glut-IPSPs) of small amplitude (4 mV), delayed peak latency (100-110 ms), and long duration (300-400 ms). Recurrent activation of interneurons via glutamate stimulation of pyramidal cells by local application in stratum pyramidale (PYR) evoked recurrent IPSPs (PYR glut-IPSPs) with similar amplitude and time course as O/A glut-IPSPs. The mean equilibrium potential of O/A glut-IPSPs (-77 mV) was significantly different from that of the PYR glut-IPSPs (-71 mV), however, neither equilibrium potential was significantly different from that of the electrically evoked early IPSP in the same cells. Glutamate-evoked IPSPs elicited from O/A displayed some response reversal (27% reversal) like those evoked from PYR (41% reversal). The early IPSP evoked by electrical stimulation displayed significantly more response reversal (67% reversal) than glut-IPSPs. Both types of glut-IPSPs (O/A and PYR) were associated with moderate increases in membrane conductance (5.9 and 6.6 nS, respectively), which were significantly less than the conductance change associated with the early IPSP (45.8 nS). In interneurons within PYR, glutamate stimulation in PYR readily elicited a flurry of excitatory postsynaptic potentials, whereas glutamate stimulation in O/A elicited IPSPs. The electrophysiological properties of IPSPs elicited in pyramidal cells by glutamate stimulation of interneurons in O/A were similar to those of recurrent IPSPs evoked from PYR. Given that both of these types of glutamate-evoked IPSPs were mostly mediated via GABAA receptor channels (Samulack DD, Lacaille J-C, 1993, Hippocampus 3:345-358), the small differences observed between equilibrium potentials, response reversals, and conductance changes could be due to a more electronically distant location from the soma of the synapses involved in O/A glut-IPSPs as compared to those of recurrent IPSPs elicited from PYR.