Injecting 0.5-1.0 microgram of cholera toxin into rat hippocampus induces a chronic epileptic focus which generates interictal discharges and brief epileptic seizures intermittently over the following seven to 10 days. Here we examined the electrophysiological properties of hippocampal slices prepared from these rats three to four days after injection, at the height of the epileptic syndrome. These slices generated epileptic discharges in response to electrical stimulation of afferent pathways. In many cases epileptic discharges occurred spontaneously in the CA3 subregion; these usually lasted < 200 ms, but they could last < 0.6 s. Intracellular recordings from pyramidal layer cells revealed depolarization shifts synchronous with the epileptic field potentials. These depolarization shifts had slow onsets compared with those induced by blocking inhibition with bicuculline (depolarizations started a mean of 57 ms before, and reached 5.2 mV by, the onset of the cholera toxin epileptic field potential, compared with 12 ms and 3.6 mV respectively for 70 microM bicuculline methiodide). Extracellular unit recordings showed that the slow predepolarization seen in the cholera toxin focus was associated with an acceleration of the firing of other pyramidal layer neurons. The epileptic activity in this model cannot be attributed to the loss of synaptic inhibition, because inhibitory postsynaptic potentials could be evoked when the synchronous bursts were blocked by increasing [Ca2+]o from 2 to 8 mM. Observations of monosynaptic inhibitory postsynaptic currents isolated by application of 20 microM 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione, 50 microM DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid and 100-200 microM 3-amino-2-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-hydroxy-propylsulphonic acid showed a small effect of the toxin only on the time course of the inhibitory postsynaptic current. On the other hand, there were significant changes in the intrinsic properties of individual neurons. The membrane potentials of cells in the cholera toxin focus did not differ from those in slices from rats injected with vehicle solution, but their input resistances were significantly increased. Unlike the other cellular changes in this model, the increase in input resistance was not seen in slices exposed acutely to 1 micrograms/ml cholera toxin for 30 min, suggesting there may be morphological changes in the chronic focus. Action potential accommodation and the slow afterhyperpolarization were depressed in both acute and chronic epileptic tissue, indicating impairments of Ca(2+)- and/or voltage-dependent K+ currents, and we conclude that these provide the most likely basis for cholera toxin epileptogenesis.