The effects of inhibition of locus coeruleus neuronal discharge activity on cortical and hippocampal electroencephalographic activity were examined in halothane-anesthetized rats. A combined recording/infusion probe was used to place 35-150-nl infusions of the alpha 2-noradrenergic agonist, clonidine (1 ng/nl) which inhibits locus coeruleus neuronal discharge activity, immediately adjacent to the locus coeruleus. The recording electrode allowed verification and quantification of the electrophysiological effects of these infusions. Simultaneously, electroencephalographic activity was recorded from sites in frontal neocortex and dorsal hippocampus and subjected to power spectrum analyses. Neither cortical nor hippocampal electroencephalographic activity was substantially affected following unilateral locus coeruleus inactivation. In contrast, bilateral clonidine infusions that completely suppressed locus coeruleus neuronal discharge activity in both hemispheres altered cortical and hippocampal electroencephalographic status. The cortical response to bilateral LC inhibition was characterized by a shift from low-amplitude, high-frequency to large-amplitude, slow-wave activity. Additionally, theta-dominated activity in the hippocampus was replaced with mixed frequency activity. The onset of these changes in forebrain electroencephalographic activity was coincident with the complete bilateral inhibition of locus coeruleus neuronal discharge activity. The resumption of pre-infusion electroencephalographic patterns closely followed recovery of locus coeruleus neuronal activity or could be induced with systemic administration of the alpha 2-noradrenergic antagonist, idazoxan. Clonidine infusions placed 800-1200 microns from the locus coeruleus were less effective at inducing a complete suppression of locus coeruleus activity. These infusions either did not completely inhibit locus coeruleus discharge (35 nl infusions), or did so with a longer latency to complete locus coeruleus inhibition and a shorter duration of inhibition (150 nl infusions). Changes in forebrain electroencephalographic activity occurred only following the complete bilateral suppression of locus coeruleus neuronal discharge activity. These electroencephalographic responses closely followed or coincided with the onset of complete bilateral locus coeruleus inhibition and persisted throughout the period during which bilateral LC neuronal discharge activity was completely absent (60-240 min). Recovery of electroencephalographic patterns was coincident with the reappearance of locus coeruleus discharge activity. These results suggest that the clonidine-induced changes in forebrain electroencephalographic activity were dependent on the complete bilateral suppression of locus coeruleus discharge activity, and that under the present experimental conditions the locus coeruleus/noradrenergic system exerts a potent and tonic activating influence on forebrain electroencephalographic state. These results support the hypothesis that this system may be an important modulator of behavioral state and/or state-dependent processes.