Low-level electrical stimulation through electrodes in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) was used to disrupt the performance of chiasm-split macaques working in a delayed matching-to-sample (DMS) visual memory task. The stimulation was below afterdischarge threshold and did not distract the animals. Nonetheless, stimulation caused severe deficits when delivered either during encoding or retrieval stages. Substantially less deficit appeared when stimulation was delivered during the retention interval. Stimulation levels which led to significant disruption on the DMS task had no effect on a discrimination task using the same kinds of images. Unilateral electrical stimulation delivered to MTL in one hemisphere during encoding and to MTL in the other hemisphere during retrieval produced an effective disruption, suggesting that the unilateral stimulation during the encoding period disrupts the encoding on that side while unilateral stimulation delivered to the opposite side during the retrieval period prevents the retrieval of the (now unilateral) memory. This suggestion is supported by control experiments in which significantly less disruption was caused by unilateral electrical stimulation delivered during both the encoding and the retrieval period if the stimulation was delivered to the same side in both periods. The electrical stimulation was further used to determine that interhemispheric access by one hemisphere to memories placed in the other was excellent. This was done, in these split-chiasm monkeys, by using unilateral stimulation to limit memory formation to just one hemisphere, then testing interhemispheric access by routing the test through the "ignorant" hemisphere (using just the ipsilateral eye). Successful interhemispheric access was obtained with either the anterior commissure or with the splenium of the corpus callosum (the other interhemispheric forebrain pathways having been cut). The electrical stimulation was also used to determine that the visual inputs even though entering via just one eye and one hemisphere, lead to bilateral memory formation. In this case each hemisphere was tested separately during retrieval by delivering disruptive levels of the electrical stimulation to the MTL of the other hemisphere.