Tyrosine protein kinases trkA, trkB and trkC are signal transduction receptors for a family of neurotrophic factors known as the neurotrophins. Here we report on changes in the expression of messenger RNAs for trkA, trkB and trkC in the brain following an injury caused by insertion of a 30-gauge needle into adult rat hippocampus or neocortex. Quantitative in situ hybridization revealed no change in the level of trkA messenger RNAs in any brain region following this insult. In contrast, increased levels of trkB messenger RNA compared to untreated animals were seen in the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus ipsilateral to the injury already 30 min after the injury. The increase reached maximal levels (four-fold) between 2 and 4 h, but returned to control levels 8 h after the injury. No change was seen in the contralateral dentate gyrus. The levels of trkC messenger RNA increased in the same brain regions as trkB messenger RNA, though with a delayed response, reaching a maximal increase of 3.3-fold 4 h after the injury. As for trkB messenger RNA, the level of trkC messenger RNA then tapered off and reached control levels 8 h after the injury. However, 4 h after the injury, a 1.7-fold increase of trkB and trkC messenger RNAs were seen in the ipsilateral piriform cortex. The increases of trkB and trkC messenger RNAs were confirmed using a nuclease protection assay. Increases of both trkB and trkC messenger RNAs were also seen in the piriform cortex, but not in the hippocampus, following needle insertion into the neocortex. Pretreatment of the animals with the non-competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist ketamine completely prevented the increases of trkB and trkC messenger RNAs, suggesting that the brain injury caused a release of glutamate with subsequent activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. In contrast, the anticonvulsive drug diazepam, the muscarinic antagonist atropine and the calcium-channel antagonist nimodipine had no effect on the increases of trkB and trkC messenger RNAs. Combined with previous data on the expression of neurotrophin messenger RNAs following similar injuries, our results support the hypothesis that increased levels of neurotrophins and their receptors could protect against neuronal damage following a brain insult.