Previous studies have shown the basement membrane form of heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) known as perlecan, co-localized to beta-amyloid protein (A beta)-containing amyloid deposits in brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Down's syndrome. Although HSPG was localized to diffuse A beta plaques in hippocampus, amygdala, and neocortex, it is not known whether they are present in diffuse A beta plaques in cerebellum. In the present study, Alcian blue staining and immunocytochemical techniques were used to determine whether highly sulfated glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and/or HSPG (perlecan) were also present in diffuse A beta plaques of cerebellum. Tissues from cases of AD were examined for the co-localization of highly sulfated GAGs, HSPGs, and A beta in diffuse plaques in cerebellum in comparison with hippocampus. Consecutive serial sections of AD brain tissue were stained or immunostained with 1) the modified Bielschowsky stain; 2) a polyclonal antibody directed against synthetic A beta (1-40); 3) Congo red; 4) Alcian blue (pH 5.7) with varying concentrations of magnesium chloride for identification of sulfated and highly sulfated GAGs; and 5) polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies recognizing either the core protein or a specific GAG epitope on perlecan. All cases (7 of 7) of AD contained diffuse A beta plaques in the cerebellum as identified by positive Bielschowsky staining and A beta immunoreactivity. None of these cases demonstrated positive Alcian blue staining (at 0.3 and 0.7 mol/L MgCl2), HSPG, or HS GAG immunoreactivity in the same diffuse cerebellar plaques on adjacent serial sections. However, Alcian blue staining, HSPG, and/or HS GAG immunoreactivity were observed in blood vessel walls, choroid plexus, and within Purkinje cells, suggesting that the techniques used were reliable and specific. In cerebellum, all plaques containing amyloid cores that were Congo red-positive were also positive for highly sulfated GAGs (by Alcian blue staining at 0.7 mol/L MgCl2) and HSPG (both core protein and GAG chain) immunoreactivity. Even though HSPG immunoreactivity was not present in cerebellar diffuse plaques, all cases (4 of 4) examined demonstrated HSPG (both core protein and GAG chain) immunoreactivity in diffuse A beta plaques in hippocampus. Therefore, by Alcian blue staining and immunocytochemical methods, highly sulfated GAGs and HSPGs are not present in A beta diffuse plaques in cerebellum. Since previous studies indicate that the cerebellum contains relatively few amyloid-containing plaques in comparison with diffuse plaques, these studies suggest that HSPG may be an essential component needed for amyloid formation and/or persistence in brain as observed in cortical areas.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)