The expression of beta 1, beta 2, beta 3, gamma 2 and delta subunit messenger RNAs of the GABAA receptor was followed by in situ hybridization histochemistry using radiolabeled oligodeoxynucleotide probes in sections of embryonic (E12-21) and early postnatal (P1-5) rat. beta 2, beta 3 and gamma 2 subunit messenger RNAs were first detectable at E15 in the spinal cord (ventral > dorsal) and lower central nervous system regions (e.g. pons, medulla and thalamus). beta 3 subunit messenger RNA was abundantly expressed in olfactory bulb neurons at E15. At E17, the expression pattern of these subunit messenger RNAs continued in the lower central nervous system. In the upper central nervous system, beta 2, beta 3, and gamma 2 subunit messenger RNAs were first detectable in the outer layer of the hippocampal and entire cortical neuroepithelium. The expression for both beta 3 and gamma 2 subunit messenger RNAs increased significantly over that observed at E15, whereas beta 2 subunit messenger RNA increased to a lesser extent and was more discretely expressed in inferior colliculus, cerebellar neuroepithelium and spinal cord (ventral = dorsal). By E19, messenger RNAs for beta 2, beta 3 and gamma 2 subunits a widespread and abundant co-existent distribution throughout the central nervous system. Exceptions to this co-expression were the absence of beta 2 messenger RNA in the dentate gyrus and beta 3 messenger RNA in entorhinal cortex, areas in which they are present in adult. There was also a differential distribution of subunit messenger RNAs in developing olfactory bulb at E19-20: the glomerular cells preferentially expressed beta 3 and gamma 2 subunit messenger RNAs; the mitral cells preferentially expressed beta 2 subunit messenger RNA; inner granule cells expressed moderate levels of beta 2, beta 3 and gamma 2 subunit messenger RNAs. Expression of beta 2, beta 3 and gamma 2 messenger RNAs was also anatomically co-existent at P5. In addition, significant expression of beta 1 and delta subunit messenger RNAs was apparent in hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. The identity of the gamma 2 expressed between E15 and E21 was shown to be mostly the short isoform of gamma 2 subunit messenger RNA. Expression of both forms was evident beginning around P3-5. These results indicate that during the late embryonic and early postnatal period of development, beta 2, beta 3 and gamma 2 subunit messenger RNAs are abundantly expressed and co-localized to most central nervous system regions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)