1. Intracellularly recorded low- and high-frequency (4-6 and 25-50 Hz, respectively), rhythmic, spontaneous membrane potential oscillations were investigated in pyramidal neurons of the rat hippocampus in vivo, during theta (theta, 4-6 Hz) electroencephalographic (EEG) activity, under ketamine-xylazine anesthesia. 2. The EEG activity showed two spectral peaks, one in the theta range, the other at higher frequencies (25-50 Hz). On the basis of their electrophysiological and pharmacological properties, it was concluded that the EEG theta-waves, and the fast EEG rhythm, recorded during ketamine-xylazine anesthesia, share the basic properties of those theta and fast rhythms that are recorded under the effects of other types of anesthetics. 3. When intracellular recordings (n = 32) were made with electrodes filled with potassium-acetate (K-acetate), the only CA1 and CA3 pyramidal cells (PCs) considered for further analysis were those that did not fire rhythmically at most or each cycle of the theta rhythm at the resting membrane potential. During EEG-theta, the membrane potential (Vm) of these cells showed a prominent oscillation (3-15 mV) with frequencies similar to those of the EEG-theta (the intracellular theta rhythm, intra-theta). 4. The frequency of the intra-theta was independent of the Vm. However, the phase difference between the intra-theta and the EEG-theta was voltage dependent in both types of cells. CA1 PCs showed a large (120-180 degrees, where 360 degrees is the full cycle), gradual shift in the phase difference between the intra-theta and the EEG-theta, when the membrane was hyperpolarized to -85 from -65 mV. Although CA3 PCs displayed a larger variability in their phase-voltage relations, a voltage-dependent phase shift (90-180 degrees) could be observed in CA3 PCs as well. 5. Although the amplitude of the intra-theta in both CA1 and CA3 PCs could display large, sudden, spontaneous changes at a given Vm, the amplitude-Vm plots tended to show a minimum between -70 and -80 mV. Spontaneous changes in the amplitude of the intra-theta did not affect the phase difference between the intra- and the EEG-theta rhythms. 6. Intracellular injection of QX-314 (50-100 mM) did not change the phase-Vm or the amplitude-Vm relationships of CA1 PCs. 7. Intracellular injection of chloride (Cl-) ions greatly reduced the voltage dependency of the phase difference and revealed fast (duration: 20-25 ms), depolarizing potentials (5-20 mV), which appeared at high frequencies (25-50 Hz), amplitude modulated at theta-frequencies.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)