This investigation describes the schedule and regional distribution of astrocytic responses in striatum following deafferentation by unilateral frontal cortex ablation. In the ipsilateral deafferented striatum, glial fibrillary acidic protein and clusterin (sulfated glycoprotein-2) messengerRNA showed peak elevations by 10 days postlesioning (Northern blots). Vimentin messengerRNA responded faster, with a transient elevation by three days postlesioning. The messengerRNA for glial fibrillary acidic protein, clusterin and vimentin returned toward control levels by 27 days postlesioning. However, the neuronal marker growth-associated protein messengerRNA, was decreased at all postlesion times. By in situ hybridization, the increased glial fibrillary acidic protein messengerRNA and clusterin messengerRNA signals were localized mainly to the dorsal half of the ipsilateral deafferented striatum and followed the same schedule as found by Northern blots. Glial fibrillary acidic protein messengerRNA was widely diffused in the dorsal striatum and was excluded from fascicles of the internal capsule; a similar distribution was found for glial fibrillary acidic protein-immunopositive astrocytes. While clusterin messengerRNA signal showed a distinct clustering, its immunoreactivity appeared as deposits in the deafferented striatal neuropil; Western blots confirmed the immunocytochemical results. By in situ hybridization, vimentin messengerRNA was mostly localized to the cortical wound cavity dorsal to the deafferented striatum and overlapped the distribution of vimentin-immunopositive cells. These findings suggest a coordination of striatal astrocytic messengerRNA responses with the degeneration of corticostriatal afferents. We also compared these same parameters with those from published reports on the hippocampus after deafferenting lesions. Certain astrocyte molecular responses to deafferentation are detected about five days earlier in the hippocampus than in the striatum. This different schedule in response to decortication may pertain to differences in synaptic remodeling in the hippocampus vs striatum.