The preoptic area contains most of the luteinizing hormone releasing hormone immunoreactive neurons and numerous monoaminergic afferents whose cell origins are unknown in sheep. Using tract tracing methods with a specific retrograde fluorescent tracer, fluorogold, we examined the cells of origin of afferents to the medial preoptic area in sheep. Among the retrogradely labeled neurons, immunohistochemistry for tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine-beta-hydroxylase, phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase, and serotonin was used to characterize catecholamine and serotonin fluorogold labeled neurons. Most of the afferents came from the ipsilateral side to the injection site. It was observed that the medial preoptic area received major inputs from the diagonal band of Broca, the lateral septum, the thalamic paraventricular nucleus, the lateral hypothalamus, the area dorsolateral to the third ventricle, the perimamillary area, the amygdala, and the ventral part of the hippocampus. Other numerous, scattered, retrogradely labeled neurons were observed in the ventral part of the preoptic area, the vascular organ of the lamina terminalis, the ventromedial part of the hypothalamus, the periventricular area, the area lateral to the interpeduncular nucleus, and the dorsal vagal complex. Noradrenergic afferents came from the complex of the locus coeruleus (A6/A7 groups) and from the ventro-lateral medulla (group A1). However, dopaminergic and adrenergic neuronal groups retrogradely labeled with fluorogold were not observed. Serotoninergic fluorogold labeled neurons belonged to the medial raphe nucleus (B8, B5) and to the serotoninergic group situated lateral to the interpeduncular nucleus (S4). In the light of these anatomical data we hypothesize that these afferents have a role in the regulation of several functions of the preoptic area, particularly those related to reproduction. Accordingly these afferents could be involved in the control of luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) pulsatility or of preovulatory LHRH surge.