Slices of hippocampal area CA1 in the rat were employed to test the hypothesis that the activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors during tetanization is necessary for the late maintenance of long-term potentiation. If the metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist L-2-amino-3-phosphonopropionate was present during tetanization, post-tetanic and early long-term potentiation of the population spike as well as field excitatory postsynaptic potential developed almost normally. However, 100 min after tetanization, long-term potentiation of the field excitatory postsynaptic potential decreased in an irreversible manner. The same concentration of D-2-amino-3-phosphonopropionate was ineffective. If L-2-amino-3-phosphonopropionate was applied 120 min after tetanization, it did not influence long-term potentiation. The presence of the metabotropic glutamate receptor agonist trans-D,L-1-aminocyclopentane-1,3-dicarboxylic acid during tetanization weakly enhanced the slope of field excitatory postsynaptic potential long-term potentiation. The influence of L-2-amino-3-phosphonopropionate and D,L-1-aminocyclopentane-1,3-dicarboxylic acid on ionotropic glutamate receptors was studied using whole-cell voltage-clamp and pressure application techniques. No effect of L-2-amino-3-phosphonopropionate on either early or late components of excitatory postsynaptic currents could be detected at the concentration used to block long-term potentiation. It is therefore unlikely that the effect of L-2-amino-3-phosphonopropionate on long-term potentiation is due to an interaction with N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors or alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptors. However, bath-applied 1S,3R-D,L-1-aminocyclopentane-1,3-dicarboxylic acid facilitated the N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced depolarization in response to N-methyl-D-aspartate pressure application in a reversible manner. These data suggest that besides the involvement of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors the activation of a 2-amino-3-phosphonopropionate-sensitive metabotropic glutamate receptors during or immediately after tetanization is necessary for subsequent mechanisms responsible for the maintenance of long-term potentiation. A link between metabotropic glutamate receptors and protein kinase C activation during long-term potentiation is discussed considering the similar time course of long-term potentiation blockade after application of L-2-amino-3-phosphonopropionate and protein kinase C inhibitors.