To investigate the effects of ionic changes possibly associated with hibernation, hippocampal slices prepared from golden hamsters were studied in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) of variable composition (K+ 3-5 mM, Ca2+ 2-4 mM, Mg2+ 2-4 mM, pH 7.0-7.7) at temperatures of 15-20 degrees C, just above the temperature below which synaptic transmission is blocked. Population action potentials (population spikes, PSs) of CA1 pyramidal cells were evoked by stimulation of the Schaffer collaterals/commissural fibers with paired pulses (interpulse interval 50 ms, interval between pairs 30 s). The responses evoked at given temperatures were investigated as a function of extracellular ion concentrations. In ACSF containing 3 mM K+, 2 mM Ca2+ and 2 mM Mg2+, PSs could be evoked at temperatures of > approximately 16 degrees C whereas at lower temperatures synaptic transmission was blocked. The threshold temperature was slightly higher for the first (PS1) than for the second PS (PS2) evoked by paired-pulse stimulation. The slices displayed paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) at all temperatures. Elevation of [K+]o from 3 to 5 mM depressed the amplitudes of both PS1 and PS2, with a stronger effect on PS2. PPF was reduced and, at near-threshold temperatures, turned into paired-pulse depression (PPD). Elevation of [Ca2+]o from 2 to 4 mM increased the amplitude of PS1. The amplitude of PS2, in contrast, was reduced at near-threshold temperatures. PPF turned into PPD. Elevation of [Mg2+]o from 2 to 4 mM reduced the amplitudes of both PS1 and PS2, with a stronger effect on PS1. Accordingly, PPF was increased. Acidification by 0.3 pH units strongly depressed the amplitudes of PS1 as well as PS2 and increased PPF. Alkalization by 0.4 pH units had only weak effects in the opposite direction. Changes in the ionic composition comparable to those investigated in the present study presumably occur in the brain interstitium of hamsters during entrance into hibernation. According to our results, such changes depress synaptic transmission at low temperatures in the hamster hippocampus in vitro. This modulation may be important for the regulation of neuronal activity during entrance into hibernation.