Preproenkephalin (PPE) gene expression is specifically induced by estrogen in hypothalamus of ovariectomized (OVX) females, better than in male rats. To study estrogen actions on gene regulation, we have presently characterized protein-DNA interactions by use of a consensus estrogen response element (ERE) and a putative ERE from PPE gene, with nuclear extracts from hypothalamus. By use of the electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), ERE binding activity was detected in nuclear extracts from neuronal tissues including hypothalamus, hippocampus, striatum, cerebellum and frontal cortex, and non-neuronal tissues such as pituitary and uterus, but not lung of OVX female rats with a consensus ERE, as well as a 129-bp PCR fragment from PPE promoter and a hairpin oligonucleotide that contains a putative ERE of the rat PPE gene. The ERE binding was eliminated by the addition of specific ERE-containing oligonucleotide, but not control oligonucleotides. Protein and DNA associated and dissociated very rapidly. By use of supershift assay, interactions of estrogen receptor with ERE were demonstrated in hypothalamic nuclear extracts. The initial levels of specific ERE binding in the hypothalamic nuclear extracts were comparable between castrated male and OVX female rats. However, estrogen treatment, either estradiol or estradiol benzoate, produced a rapid and tissue-specific induction of a slow mobility complex of ERE binding in hypothalamic nuclear extracts from females, better than in male rats, presumably from other associated factors, or a conformational change or other posttranslational modifications. This estrogen-induced slow mobility complex of ERE binding in hypothalamus was not observed after treatment with progesterone or tamoxifen. These results suggest that specific ERE binding is present in rat hypothalamic nuclear proteins, which may contribute to the upregulation of PPE gene expression by estrogen, and that the sexually differentiated action of estrogen may be related to an estrogen-induced conformational change, but not to the initial level of ERE-binding activity.