1. The effects of anoxia on excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs and IPSCs, respectively) evoked by electrical stimulation in the stratum radiatum were studied in morphologically and electrophysiologicaly identified lacunosum-moleculare (LM) interneurons of the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices. The blind whole cell patch-clamp technique was used, and anoxia was induced by superfusion of the slice with an anoxic artificial cerebral spinal fluid saturated with 95% N2-5% CO2 for 4-6 min. 2. In LM interneurons, anoxia generated currents similar to those in pyramidal cells, the most prominent being anoxic and postanoxic outward currents. The adenosine A1 type receptor antagonist 8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine (DPCPX, 200 nM) did not significantly affect anoxia-generated currents. 3. EPSCs and polysynaptic IPSCs (pIPSCs) evoked in LM interneurons by "distant" stimulation (> 1 mm) in the stratum radiatum were strongly depressed by anoxia and recovered upon reoxygenation. 4. Responses to pressure application of glutamate, alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA), and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) were not significantly affected by anoxia, suggesting that the suppression of EPSCs is due to presynaptic mechanisms. 5. DPCPX (200 nM) prevented anoxia-induced suppression of EPSCs, suggesting that this suppression was mediated by presynaptic A1 adenosine receptors. 6. Monosynaptic IPSCs evoked by "close" stimulation (< 0.5 mm) in the stratum radiatum, in the presence of glutamate-receptor antagonists 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (CNQX; 20 microM) and D-2-amino-5-phosphopentanoate (APV; 50 microM), were reversibly depressed but not blocked by anoxia. 7. Anoxia depressed monosynaptic GABAA receptor-mediated IPSCs (monosynaptic IPSCAs) by inducing a positive shift in the reversal potential and a decrease in slope conductance. Responses to pressure-applied isoguvacine, a GABAA receptor agonist, were reversibly depressed by anoxia, again because of a positive shift in reversal potential and decrease in conductance. Anoxic effects on slope conductances and reversal potential of isoguvacine responses and monosynaptic IPSCA coincided, suggesting that evoked transmitter release from GABAergic terminals was not affected by anoxia. 8. Anoxic depression of monosynaptic GABAB receptor-mediated IPSCs (monosynaptic IPSCBs) was due to a decrease in the slope conductance of monosynaptic IPSCB. In contrast to EPSCs, DPCPX (200 nM) failed to prevent anoxia-induced depression of mIPSCA and mIPSCB. 9. Paired-pulse depression of monosynaptic IPSCs, partially mediated by presynaptic GABAB receptors, was not affected by anoxia. 10. These data provide direct evidence for the hypothesis that inhibitory interneurons of CA1 stratum LM are functionally disconnected from excitatory inputs by anoxia. This disconnection underlies the preferential block by anoxia of IPSCs recorded in pyramidal cells, and it may occult the postsynaptic modifications in GABAA and GABAB responses. This disconnection involves adenosine-dependent inhibition of glutamate release from excitatory terminals. GABA release and its modulation by presynaptic GABAB receptors, both known to be insensitive to adenosine, seems to be resistant to anoxia.