Somatostatin-, neuropeptide Y-, neurokinin B- and cholecystokinin-containing neurons were investigated in the rat hippocampus in two chronic models of temporal lobe epilepsy, i.e. 30 days after rapid kindling or electrically induced status epilepticus (post-status epilepticus). After rapid kindling, somatostatin immunoreactivity was strongly increased in interneurons and in the outer and middle molecular layer of the dentate gyrus. In four of six post-status epilepticus rats (status epilepticus I rats), somatostatin immunoreactivity was slightly increased in the dorsal but decreased in the ventral dentate gyrus and molecular layer. Somatostatin immunoreactivity decreased in neurons of the dorsal hilus in the two other post-status epilepticus rats investigated, while a complete loss was found in the respective ventral extension (status epilepticus-II rats). These changes were associated with a different extent of neurodegeneration as assessed by Nissl staining. Similarly, neuropeptide Y immunoreactivity was enhanced in neurons of the hilus and in the middle and outer molecular layer of the dentate gyrus in the dorsal hippocampus of rapidly kindled and status epilepticus-I rats. Neuropeptide Y and neurokinin B immunoreactivity was enhanced in the mossy fibers of all post-status epilepticus rats, but not in the rapidly kindled rats. In status epilepticus-II rats, neuropeptide Y-and neurokinin B-positive fibers were also detected in the infrapyramidal region of the stratum oriens of CA3 and in the inner molecular layer of the dentate gyrus in the dorsal and ventral hippocampus respectively, labeling presumably sprouted mossy fibers. Increased staining of neuropeptide Y and neurokinin B was found in the alveus after rapid kindling. Cholecystokinin immunoreactivity was markedly increased in the cerebral cortex, Ammon's horn and the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus in the ventral hippocampus of rapidly kindled and post-status epilepticus rats. The lasting changes in the immunoreactive pattern of various peptides in the hippocampus may reflect functional modifications in the corresponding peptide-containing neurons. These changes may be involved in chronic epileptogenesis, which evolves in response to limbic seizures.