The endogenous neuroinhibitory and neuroprotective excitatory amino acid receptor antagonist kynurenic acid has been hypothetically linked to the pathogenesis of epilepsy and several other brain disorders. In the present study, alterations in kynurenic acid levels were examined in the kainate model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Kainate was systemically injected in rats at a dose (10 mg/kg s.c.) which induces a characteristic behavioural syndrome with stereotypies and focal (limbic) and generalized seizures, eventually progressing into severe status epilepticus. Kynurenic acid was determined 3 h after kainate injection in various brain regions (olfactory bulb, frontal cortex, piriform cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, nucleus accumbens, caudate/putamen, thalamus, superior and inferior colliculus, pons and medulla, and cerebellar cortex) and in plasma, using a sensitive high-performance liquid chromatographic method. When data were analysed irrespective of individual seizure severity, significant increases in kynurenic acid were determined in all brain regions examined except the hippocampus, nucleus accumbens and pons/medulla. The most marked (200-500%) increases above controls were seen in the piriform cortex, amygdala, and cerebellar cortex. Furthermore, a significant kynurenic acid increase of about 200% above control was determined in plasma. When kynurenic acid levels were determined in subgroups of rats with different behavioural alterations in response to kainate, the most marked kynurenic acid increases were seen in subgroups with status epilepticus. Rats which only developed mild (focal) seizures or stereotyped behaviours (wet dog shakes) also exhibited significantly increased kynurenic acid levels, thus indicating that the increase in kynurenic acid in response to kainate was not solely due to sustained convulsive seizure activity. Whereas it was previously proposed that kynurenic acid is involved only in later stages of seizure disorders, the present data demonstrate that marked increases in central and peripheral kynurenic acid levels occur early after the onset of neuroexcitation, at least in the kainate model.