The effects of synthetic omega-grammotoxin SIA (omega-GsTxSIA) and synthetic omega-Aga-IVA were tested in in vitro and in vivo neurochemical assays that are reflective of voltage-sensitive calcium channel function. Synthetic omega-GsTx SIA inhibited K(+)-evoked rat and chick synaptosomal 45Ca2+ flux, K(+)-evoked release of [3H]D-aspartate and [3H]norepinephrine from rat hippocampal brain slices and K(+)-evoked release of [3H]norepinephrine from chick cortical brain slices with potency values that were comparable to those found previously with omega-GsTx SIA purified from the venom of the tarantula spider Grammostola spatulata. These results indicate that trace contaminants do not account for the pharmacology of purified omega-GsTx SIA. omega-GsTx SIA caused a complete inhibition of rat synaptosomal 45Ca2+ flux and hippocampal slice [3H]D-aspartate release, whereas omega-Aga-IVA caused a maximal inhibition of approx 75%. omega-GsTx SIA and omega-Aga-IVA caused an identical partial inhibition of K(+)-evoked increases of intracellular calcium in cortical neurons in primary culture. The addition of nitrendipine to either omega-GsTx SIA or omega-Aga-IVA resulted in an additive and virtually complete inhibition of the cortical neuron intracellular calcium response. In in vivo microdialysis studies, the K(+)-evoked release of glutamate from hippocampus of awake freely moving rats was inhibited with the following rank order of potency: omega-conotoxin GVIA > omega-GsTx SIA > omega-Aga-IVA. Complete inhibition of K(+)-evoked hippocampal glutamate release was observed with 300 nM omega-conotoxin GVIA and 3 microM omega-GsTx SIA. In urethane anesthetized rats, omega-CgTx GVIA caused a partial inhibition, whereas omega-GsTx SIA caused a concentration-dependent and complete inhibition, of basal serotonin release in the hippocampus. Therefore, omega-GsTx SIA was shown to inhibit responses that are sensitive to omega-conotoxin GVIA, omega-Aga-IVA and omega-conotoxin MVIIC, consistent with the notion that omega-GsTx SIA inhibits N-, P- and Q-type high threshold voltage-sensitive calcium channels.