The immunocytochemical distribution of the AMPA-selective receptor subunits GluR1 and GluR2/3 were mapped in the human hippocampal formation obtained from surgery for medically intractable temporal lobe epilepsy. GluR2/3 immunoreactivity was detected in all principal cell types of the hippocampal formation, including hilar neurons, granule cells of the dentate gyrus, and pyramidal cells of the cornu ammonis fields and subiculum. GluR2/3 immunostaining typically filled the cell bodies and processes of neurons. A comparison of GluR2/3 immunoreactivity in a sclerotic specimen versus a non-sclerotic specimen demonstrated a profound loss of staining, specifically in the areas where neuronal dropout was occurring, including CA1, CA3 and the hilus. An analysis of GluR1 immunoreactivity in non-sclerotic specimens revealed that it was predominantly localized to cellular processes throughout the cornu ammonis fields, with a sparse staining of the dentate gyrus outer molecular layer and little to no staining of the dentate gyrus inner molecular layer. Similar to the GluR2/3-immunostained patterns, GluR1 immunoreactivity was lost in the cornu ammonis fields of sclerotic hippocampal specimens, corresponding to patterns of neuronal dropout. Our most compelling finding was a unique extensive pattern of GluR1 and Glu2/3 immunoreactivity throughout the molecular layers of the dentate gyrus of severely compromised hippocampi. The altered staining of GluR1 and GluR2/3 complements some of the patterns of axonal sprouting already described for the dentate gyrus, with a conjecture that their anatomy and distribution pattern underlies to some degree the reorganization of the sclerotic hippocampus. A combination of enhanced glutamatergic transmission and changes in neuropeptides that modulate hippocampal circuitry could greatly affect the degree of excitability in the hippocampal formation. The alterations of GluR1 and GluR2/3 immunoreactivity in the dentate gyrus add another component to the concept of reorganization in the epileptic sclerotic hippocampus.