The experiments examined the release of 5-hydroxytryptamine using in vivo microdialysis methods in the hippocampus of freely moving rats following Pavlovian aversive conditioning to discrete and contextual stimuli. Differential conditioning was achieved by manipulating the interval between the offset of a discrete auditory 'clicker' stimulus and the onset of a mild foot-shock reinforcer (0.5 mA, 0.5 s). Foot-shock occurred either simultaneously with the last second of the discrete auditory stimulus (in short-trace subjects) or 60 s later (long-trace subjects). In this way, subjects were preferentially conditioned to the discrete stimulus and background 'contextual' stimuli respectively. During conditioning subjects also received two identical unpaired visual stimuli. At test, dialysates were collected and behavioural measures taken as all animals experienced (i) the aversive and two other 'neutral' environments, and (ii) the discrete unconditioned and conditioned stimuli presented in both aversive and neutral environments. Exposure to the aversive environment, but not to either of the two neutral environments, was associated with significantly increased hippocampal 5-hydroxytryptamine release in long-trace subjects. There was also a small but non-significant increase in 5-hydroxytryptamine release in short-trace animals. In contrast, hippocampal 5-hydroxytryptamine release was unaffected by presentation of either of the discrete stimuli under all conditions. The last result was obtained despite robust behavioural responses (freezing) to the discrete conditioned stimulus. These data do not agree with the hypothesis that aversive cues generally activate 5-hydroxytryptamine function in the hippocampus. Rather, they suggest a degree of specificity whereby 5-hydroxytryptamine release in the hippocampus was determined primarily by other qualitative properties of the conditioned aversive stimulus, namely whether the aversive cue was discrete or contextual, as well as by the magnitude of conditioning.