The expression of the messenger RNAs encoding N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunits in neurologically normal post-mortem human brain was studied by in situ hybridization. In the caudate, putamen and nucleus accumbens strong hybridization signals were observed for N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-1 messenger RNA but much weaker signals for N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-3 and N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-4, N-Methyl-D-aspartate R1-2 was not detectable. N-methyl-D-aspartate R2B was the only N-methyl-D-aspartate R2 subunit detected in these nuclei. In the hippocampus the messenger RNAs for both N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-1 and N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-4 were strongly expressed in the dentate gyrus, CA3-CA1 pyramidal cells, subiculum, entorhinal cortex and perirhinal cortex. Much lower expression was seen for N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-2 and N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-3. The messenger RNAs for both N-methyl-D-aspartate R2A and N-methyl-D-aspartate R2B, but not N-methyl-D-aspartate R2C, subunits were expressed in the hippocampus. In the temporal cortex all N-methyl-D-aspartate RI isoforms were expressed (N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-1 and N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-4 being the most abundant) and N-methyl-D-aspartate R2A and N-methyl-D-aspartate R2B but not N-methyl-D-aspartate R2C were also moderately expressed. In the brain stem N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-4 was strongly expressed in various nuclei including the locus coeruleus, nucleus centralis superior and deep pontine nuclei. Only weak expression was seen for N-methyl-D-aspartate RI-1 and N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-3 but not N-methyl-D-aspartate RI-2; of the N-methyl-D-aspartate R2 subunits only N-methyl-D-aspartate R2C was found to be expressed in these nuclei. In the cerebellum all the N-methyl-D-aspartate I isoforms were expressed (mostly N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-4) in the Purkinje layer which also expressed N-methyl-D-aspartate R2A and N-methyl-D-aspartate R2C. In the molecular layer cells were found expressing N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-4 and N-methyl-D-aspartate R2B and cells in the granule layer were found to express N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-1, N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-3 and N-methyl-D-aspartate R1-4 and N-methyl-D-aspartate R2C only. Preliminary studies indicated that the messenger RNA for the N-methyl-D-aspartate R2D subunit was not expressed in the above areas of brain. These results give the first demonstration of the distribution of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit messenger RNAs in the human brain. The region-specific expression of subunit combinations suggests a heterogeneity of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors with diverse physiological/pathophysiological roles and provides a rationale for the development of discriminatory N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists to target selective neuronal populations.