The effects of adenosine on hippocampal neurons were examined by patch-clamp recording and Ca2+ imaging using fura-2 fluorescence. In the whole-cell patch-clamp configuration, adenosine evoked outwardly rectifying K+ currents in a dose-dependent manner. These currents were not inhibited by a nonselective P1 purinoceptor antagonist or selective adenosine A1, A2A receptor antagonists and moreover, selective adenosine A1, A2A receptor agonists evoked no current. In contrast, P2 purinoceptor agonists produced similar outward currents with the order of potency: ADP > or = 2-methylthio ATP > ATP > adenosine >> AMP. No response was obtained to UTP, alpha, beta-methylene ATP or beta, gamma-methylene ATP. The intracellular perfusion of a broad G-protein inactivator, guanosine-5'-O-(2-thiodiphosphate) (GDP beta S), abolished adenosine-evoked currents, whereas a Gi/Go-protein inhibitor, pertussis toxin, had no effect. Furthermore, the currents were blocked by a phospholipase C inhibitor, neomycin, or specific protein kinase C inhibitors, GF109203X (bisindolyl maleimide, C25H24N4O2) and protein kinase C inhibitor peptide. In the cell-attached patch-clamp configuration, adenosine elicited single-channel currents with two major kinds of slope conductances. Likewise, application of adenosine outside the patch electrode again produced single-channel currents with same conductances. A potent protein kinase C activator, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), induced single-channel currents in a fashion that mimics the effect of adenosine. The evoked currents were blocked by GF109203X. In addition, adenosine enhanced intracellular free Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i). This [Ca2+]i increase was inhibited by GDP beta S or neomycin, but was not affected by pertussis toxin. These results, thus, suggest that adenosine activates the K+ channel and enhances cytosolic Ca2+ release via a P2Y purinoceptor linked to a pertussis toxin-insensitive G-protein, which is involved in a phospholipase C-mediated phospholipid-signaling pathway.