The role of serotonergic pathways in the hypnotic response to dexmedetomidine was examined in neurochemical and behavioral studies. Following acute administration of dexmedetomidine, loss of righting reflex and changes in serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) and norepinephrine turnover in different brain regions (locus coeruleus and hippocampus) were assessed. In separate experiments, the effect of dexmedetomidine on 5-HT turnover was measured in rats rendered tolerant to the hypnotic effects of dexmedetomidine. These neurochemical data were complemented by a study of dexmedetomidine-induced hypnotic response in the presence of a 5-HT2 receptor agonist and antagonist, 1-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane (DOI) and ritanserin, respectively. Dexmedetomidine (1-500 micrograms.kg-1) dose dependently reduced 5-HT and norepinephrine turnover in both the locus coeruleus and hippocampus. The decrease in 5-HT turnover more closely correlated with the dose-response curve for loss of righting reflex, a behavioral measure of hypnosis, than did the norepinephrine turnover. In previous studies with chronic administration of dexmedetomidine (3 micrograms.kg-1.h-1 for 7 days), the norepinephrine turnover effect of acute dexmedetomidine (30 micrograms.kg-1) persisted while the hypnotic effect was blunted. Following the same regimen, the drug's ability to diminish 5-HT turnover was also blunted. This biochemical evidence for the role of 5-HT in sleep was supported by the behavioral evidence that dexmedetomidine (100 micrograms.kg-1 i.p. or 7 micrograms.0.2 microliter-1 locus coeruleus)-induced hypnosis was dose dependently blocked by DOI (0.08-0.32 mg.kg-1 i.p.). The selectivity of this effect was demonstrated by the finding that ritanserin (0.16 mg.kg-1 i.p.) pretreatment blocked the effects of DOI (0.16 mg.kg-1 i.p.) on dexmedetomidine (100 micrograms.kg-1 i.p. or 7 micrograms.0.2 microliter-1 locus coeruleus)-induced loss of righting reflex. In conclusion, these findings suggest that the hypnotic effect of the alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist, dexmedetomidine, is not mediated solely by changes in noradrenergic neurtransmission, but instead is strongly associated with a decrease in serotonergic neurotransmission and correspondingly diminished by stimulation of 5-HT2 receptors.