1. Whole-cell patch-clamp recording has been used to study the effect of heterosynaptic depolarization on pure N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated synaptic transmission in the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices. 2. In neurones voltage clamped at -60 mV, paired-pulse stimulation of one set of Schaffer collateral-commissural fibres resulted in homosynaptic paired-pulse facilitation of the NMDA receptor-mediated excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSCN). In contrast, stimulation of one set of fibres prior to stimulation of a second set of fibres (i.e. heterosynaptic paired-pulse stimulation) did not result in any heterosynaptic interactions. 3. However, under current-clamp conditions, heterosynaptic paired-pulse stimulation resulted in heterosynaptic 'paired-pulse facilitation' of the NMDA receptor-mediated excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSPN). 4. In neurones held at -50 or -40 mV, perfusion of nominally Mg(2+)-free medium converted the response to heterosynaptic paired-pulse stimulation from 'heterosynaptic facilitation' to 'heterosynaptic depression' of EPSPN. 5. When neurones were held at potentials of between -30 and +40 mV then heterosynaptic paired-pulse stimulation, in normal Mg(2+)-containing medium, resulted in 'paired-pulse depression' of EPSPN. Under voltage-clamp conditions (tested at +40 mV) no heterosynaptic interactions were seen. 6. The time course of 'heterosynaptic facilitation' at -60 mV and of 'heterosynaptic depression' at +40 mV of EPSPN was similar to the time course of EPSCN. 7. We conclude, firstly, that the voltage clamp is able to prevent any voltage breakthrough associated with the synaptic activation of NMDA receptors from influencing neighbouring synapses. Secondly, when the neurone is not voltage clamped these same synapses are strongly influenced by the spreading depolarization generated by the synaptic activation of their neighbours. The time course and direction of this influence are compatible with the hypothesis that spreading synaptic depolarization, leading to a reduction of the voltage-dependent Mg2+ block of synaptic NMDA receptor channels, underlies the property of associativity.