1. Hippocampal slices bathed in 8 mM potassium and 0-added calcium exhibited spontaneous epileptiform activity in the dentate gyrus. Extracellular recording revealed recurrent prolonged bursts of population spikes and an associated negative DC shift. These episodes were very similar to the in vivo phenomenon termed maximal dentate activation (MDA). Therefore this in vitro activity will be referred to as MDA-like activity or events. 2. During the MDA-like activity, the individual granule cells exhibited a sustained depolarization that matched the duration of the negative extracellular DC shift. At the beginning of the MDA-like activity, there was a burst of action potentials. After the burst, most granule cells either continued to fire action potentials regularly or in bursts. Some cells exhibited this initial burst of activity and then a dramatic reduction in firing rate. This reduction in rate was followed by a gradual increase in the amplitude and frequency of the epileptiform activity recorded during the remainder of the MDA-like event. 3. Before and between MDA-like events, spontaneous cellular activity consisted of single action potentials and bursts of action potentials on a depolarizing envelope. In addition, depolarizing potentials, up to 13 mV, were recorded. There were no extracellular field potentials associated with these intracellularly recorded potentials. 4. In the 8 mM potassium, 0-added calcium test solution, the membrane potential threshold for burst production was significantly lower than in normal potassium and calcium medium. 5. The effect of depolarizing and hyperpolarizing current injections on the amplitude and frequency of the epileptiform activity was tested. Current injection had no effect on the frequency of the epileptiform activity recorded during the MDA-like events. However, the frequency of the cellular bursts between MDA-like events was very sensitive to current injection. Depolarizing current increased the frequency, and hyperpolarizing current decreased the frequency of the spontaneous activity. 6. This study has shown that in 8 mM potassium and 0-added calcium the granule cells of the dentate gyrus are capable of generating spontaneous bursts that appear to be mediated by endogenous mechanisms. In addition, synchronized epileptiform discharges were recorded from the granule cells at regular intervals that appear were recorded from the granule cells at regular intervals that appear to be mediated by exogenous nonsynaptic mechanisms.