1. Hebbian or associative synaptic plasticity has been proposed to play an important role in learning and memory. Whereas many behaviorally relevant stimuli are time-varying, most experimental and theoretical work on synaptic plasticity has focused on stimuli or induction protocols without temporal structure. Recent theoretical studies have suggested that associative plasticity sensitive to only the conjunction of pre- and postsynaptic activity is not an effective learning rule for networks required to learn time-varying stimuli. Our goal in the current experiment was to determine whether associative long-term potentiation (LTP) is sensitive to temporal structure. We examined whether the presentation of unpaired presynaptic pulses in addition to paired pre- and postsynaptic activity altered the induction of associative LTP. 2. By using intracellular recordings from CA1 pyramidal cells, associative long-term potentiation (LTP) was induced in a control pathway by pairing a single presynaptic pulse with postsynaptic depolarization every 5 s (50-70 x). The experimental pathway received the same training, with additional unpaired presynaptic pulses delivered in close temporal proximity, either after or before associative pairing. Five separate sets of experiments were performed with intervals of -200, -50, +50, +200, or +800 ms. Negative intervals indicate that the unpaired presynaptic pulse was presented before the depolarizing pulse. Our results showed that the presence of unpaired presynaptic pulses, occurring either before or after pairing, did not significantly alter the magnitude of LTP. 3. The experimental design permitted an analysis of whether changes in paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) occur as a result of associative LTP. The average degree of PPF was the same before and after LTP. However, there was a significant inverse correlation between the initial degree of PPF and the degree of PPF after LTP. There was no relationship between the change in PPF, and whether the first or second pulse had been paired with depolarization. 4. These results indicate that the presence of unpaired presynaptic pulses does not alter the induction of synaptic plasticity, suggesting that plasticity of the Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapse is primarily conjunctive rather than correlative.