1. Stimulation of the surviving afferents in the stratum radiatum of the CA1 area in kainic acid-lesioned hippocampal slices produced graded epileptiform activity, part of which (> 20%) involved the activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. There was also a failure of synaptic inhibition in this region. In this preparation, we have tested the effects of low-frequency stimulation (LFS; 1 Hz for 15 min) on synaptic responses and epileptiform activity. 2. LFS resulted in long-term depression (LTD) of excitatory synaptic potentials (EPSPs), long-term decrease of population spike amplitudes (PSAs) and EPSP-spike (E-S) potentiation. Evoked epileptiform activity was reduced but neurons had a higher probability of discharge. LTD could be reversed by subsequent tetanic stimulation whereas E-S dissociation remained unchanged. Synaptic and network responses could be saturated towards either potentiation or depression. However, E-S potentiation was maximal following the first conditioning stimulus. 3. NMDA receptor-mediated responses were pharmacologically isolated. LFS resulted in LTD of synaptic responses, long-term decrease of PSAs and E-S depression. These depressions could not be reversed by subsequent tetanic stimulation. alpha-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and NMDA receptor-mediated responses were then measured in isolation before and following conditioning stimuli. LFS was shown to simultaneously produce LTD of AMPA and NMDA receptor-mediated responses. E-S potentiation of the AMPA component and E-S depression of the NMDA component occurred coincidentally. 4. LTD of AMPA and NMDA receptor-mediated responses were shown to be NMDA dependent. In contrast, E-S potentiation and depression occurred even when NMDA receptors were pharmacologically blocked. 5. These findings indicate that synaptic responses could be modified bidirectionally in the CA1 area of kainic acid-lesioned rat hippocampus in an NMDA receptor-dependent manner. However, E-S dissociations were independent of the activation of NMDA receptors, hinting at mechanisms different from those of synaptic LTD. We suggest that changes in E-S coupling were caused by a modification of the firing threshold of the CA1 pyramidal neurons. Furthermore, the firing mechanisms controlling NMDA and AMPA receptor-mediated network activity appeared to be different. The possible use of LFS applied to the hippocampus as a clinical intervention to suppress epileptiform activity is discussed.