1. Whole cell voltage-clamp recordings were used to characterize the calcium-independent "delayed-rectifier" potassium currents of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-positive stratum radiatum-lacunosum-moleculare (st. L-M) interneurons in primary culture derived from neonate rats [postnatal day 5-7 (P5-P7)]. 2. Two distinct current phenotypes were observed, which we termed "sustained" and "slowly inactivating." Despite possessing similar voltage-dependent activation properties, current differed in their time-dependent inactivation properties and their kinetics of activation and deactivation. The phenotypes of the observed currents did not change during the time in vitro. The total current phenotype observed in any cell likely resulted from the temporal overlap of the two current components expressed in different relative proportions. 3. Externally applied 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) selectively blocked the slowly inactivating current component, by a use-dependent, but voltage-independent mechanism, suggesting that channel activation is required for 4-AP to interact with its binding site. In contrast, the sustained current component was unaffected by 4-AP. 4. Both the slowly inactivating and sustained current phenotypes were sensitive to externally applied tetraethylammonium (TEA). The IC50 of block by TEA was lower in cells expressing predominantly the sustained current components. 5. Currents recorded in the presence of internally applied TEA were of a slowly inactivating phenotype, suggesting that [TEA]i preferentially blocked the sustained current component. 6. When test pulses were preceded by a prepulse to -100 mV, a transient A-type current component was observed, but in contrast to pyramidal neurons and other interneuron types, this transient current contributed only a minor component to the total initial peak current. 7. In conclusion, two distinct, temporally overlapping potassium current phenotypes were observed on st. L-M interneurons. The overall phenotype was determined by the relative proportion of each current component. The absence of a prominent transient current suggests that the two delayed-rectifier currents play a critical role in determining the firing characteristics of these interneurons.