There is considerable evidence that GABAergic neurons play an important role in the regulation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion, and that these neurons may mediate the feedback actions of gonadal steroids on GnRH neurons. The aim of the present study was to investigate whether endogenous changes in ovarian steroid secretion during the estrous cycle influenced GABAergic neuronal activity in the preoptic region of the hypothalamus, and in other steroid-sensitive brain regions. Intact, adult female rats were sacrificed at various times during the days of metestrus or proestrus. GABAergic neuronal activity was estimated by measuring the rate of accumulation of GABA in microdissected brain regions after pharmacological inhibition of GABA degradation. Concentrations of mRNA for both forms of glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65 and GAD67) were quantified in microdissected brain regions by a microlysate ribonuclease protection assay. In the diagonal band of Broca at the level of the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis (DBB(ovlt)), GABAergic neuronal activity was significantly reduced during the afternoon of proestrus compared with the morning of either proestrus or metestrus. In the lateral septal nucleus, GABAergic neuronal activity was significantly increased in the afternoon of proestrus compared with the morning. There were no significant effects of time of day or day of estrous cycle in the medial preoptic nucleus, median eminence, ventromedial nucleus, suprachiasmatic nucleus, medial septal nucleus, hippocampus (CA1 region), or cingulate cortex. In the DBB(ovlt), mRNA levels for both GAD65 and GAD67 were significantly reduced in the afternoon of proestrus compared with the afternoon of metestrus. By contrast, there was no change in GAD65 and GAD67 mRNA levels in the cingulate cortex at any of the times examined. These results demonstrate that GABAergic neuronal activity, and mRNA levels for both GAD65 and GAD67, are reduced in the DBB(ovlt) during the afternoon of proestrus. These results support the hypothesis that decreased GABAergic neuronal activity in this region plays a major permissive role in the generation and maintenance of the estrogen-induced LH surge.