Newborn BALB/c mice intranasally inoculated at birth with a lethal dose of the immunosuppressive strain of the parvovirus minute virus of mice (MVMi) developed motor disabilities and intention tremors with a high incidence by the day 6 postinfection (dpi). These neurological syndromes paralleled the synthesis of virus intermediate DNA replicative forms and yield of infectious particles in the brain, with kinetics that peaked by this time. The preferred virus replicative sites in the brain were established early in the infection (2 dpi) and at the onset of clinical symptoms (6 dpi) and were compared with major regions of cellular proliferative activity found after intraperitoneal injection of bromodeoxyuridine 24 h before encephalons were subjected to immunohistochemistry detection. At 2 dpi, viral capsid antigen was located in the laterodorsal thalamic and the pontine nuclei but not in the extensive proliferative regions of the mouse brain at this postnatal day. At 6 dpi, however, the neurotropism of the MVMi was highlighted by its ability to target the subventricular zone of the ventricles, the subependymal zone of the olfactory bulb, and the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, which are the three main germinal centers of the cerebrum in mouse postbirth neurogenesis. Unexpectedly, in the cerebellum, the MVMi capsid antigen was confined exclusively to cells that have undergone mitosis and have migrated to the internal granular layer (IGL) and not to the proliferative external granular layer (EGL), which was stained with antiproliferative cell nuclear antigen antibody and is the main target in other parvovirus infections. This result implies temporal or differentiation coupling between MVMi cycle and neuroblast morphogenesis, since proliferative granules of the EGL should primarily be infected but must migrate in a virus carrier state into the IGL in order to express the capsid proteins. During migration, many cells undergo destruction, accounting for the marked hypocellularity specifically found in the IGL and the irregular alignment of Purkinje cell bodies, both consistent histopathological hallmarks of animals developing cerebellar symptoms. We conclude that MVMi impairs postmitotic neuronal migration occurring in the first postnatal week, when, through the natural respiratory route of infection, the virus titer peaks in the encephalon. The results illustrate the intimate connection between MVMi neuropathogenesis and mouse brain morphogenetic stage, underscoring the potential of parvoviruses as markers of host developmental programs.