1. Nitric oxide (NO) is known to stimulate soluble guanylyl cyclase, thereby eliciting an elevation of guanosine 3':5'-cyclic monophosphate (cyclic GMP) in target cells. Recently, a selective inhibitor of soluble guanylyl cyclase, 1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo[4,3-a]quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ), has been identified and characterized in vitro. We have investigated the in vivo effects of ODQ on the glutamate receptor/NO/ cyclic GMP pathway by monitoring extracellular cyclic GMP during microdialysis of the cerebellum or the hippocampus of freely-moving adult rats. 2. Intracerebellar administration of ODQ (1-100 microM) via the microdialysis probe inhibited, in a concentration-dependent manner, the basal extracellular level of cyclic GMP. The maximal inhibition, measured after a 20 min perfusion with 100 microM ODQ, amounted to 80% and persisted unchanged as long as ODQ was perfused. When ODQ was removed from the perfusion stream after 20 min, the levels of cyclic GMP started to recover, suggesting reversibility of guanylyl cyclase inhibition by ODQ. 3. The cyclic GMP response evoked in the cerebellum by NMDA (200 microM) or by alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate (AMPA; 100 microM) was largely attenuated by 100 microM ODQ. The pattern of the inhibition curves suggests competition for guanylyl cyclase between ODQ and the NO generated by NMDA or AMPA receptor activation. 4. ODQ (100 microM) prevented the elevation of extracellular cyclic GMP levels provoked by intracerebellar infusion of the NO generator S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP; 1 mM). The inhibition of the SNAP effect was rapidly relieved when ODQ was removed from the perfusion fluid. However, ODQ (100 microM) was unable to affect the cyclic GMP response elicited by 5 mM SNAP, in keeping with the proposed idea that ODQ binds to the "NO receptor' in a reversible and competitive manner. 5. Infusion of ODQ (10, 100 or 300 microM) into the hippocampus of freely-moving rats diminished the basal extracellular level of cyclic GMP. The maximal inhibition amounted to 50% and was produced by 100 microM ODQ. 6. The cyclic GMP response observed when 1 mM SNAP was perfused in the hippocampus, similar in percentage terms to that seen in cerebellum, was dramatically reduced during co-infusion of 100 microM ODQ. 7. ODQ appears to act in vivo as a selective, reversible and possibly competitive inhibitor of the soluble guanylyl cyclase targeted by NO. This enzyme may generate most (about 80%) of the cyclic GMP found under basal conditions in the extracellular space of the cerebellum. In the hippocampus, about 50% of the basal cyclic GMP does not seem to originate from the ODQ-sensitive soluble guanylyl cyclase.