We summarize data from some of our recent studies on in vitro and in vivo modulation of interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptors in the mouse brain-endocrine-immune axis by stress and infection. Ether-laparotomy stress in mice resulted in a selective increase in pituitary IL-1 receptors and a significant decrease in pituitary receptors for corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), a major regulator of the endocrine response to stress. Intraperitoneal injection of rat/human CRF mimicked the effects of stress and resulted in a dramatic increase in [125I]IL-1alpha binding in the pituitary; [125I]IL-1alpha binding in the hippocampus, spleen, and testis was unaffected by stress or CRF treatment. Glucocorticoid treatment with dexamethasone alone did not alter [125I]IL-1alpha binding but significantly inhibited CRF-induced upregulation of IL-1 receptors in the pituitary. The intracellular mechanism(s) involved in stress and CRF-induced upregulation of IL-1 receptors in the pituitary gland were examined by evaluating the effects of treatment of AtT-20 mouse pituitary corticotroph cells with a variety of neuroendocrine mediators of stress. CRF, forskolin, and isoproterenol (beta2 adrenergic receptor agonist) produced dose-dependent increases in cAMP production and [125I]IL-1alpha binding. In contrast, somatostatin and dexamethasone significantly inhibited CRF-stimulated increase of cAMP production and [125I]IL-1alpha binding, suggesting a primary role for cAMP in the regulation of pituitary IL-1 receptors. Next, we investigated the modulation of IL-1beta levels and IL-1 receptors following infection of mice with the endotoxin, lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Acute administration of low doses of endotoxin (30 mu g LPS/mouse) dramatically increased IL-1beta levels and reciprocally decreased [125I]IL-1alpha binding in peripheral tissues (pituitary, testis, liver, and spleen) but not in brain (hippocampus). This effect appeared to be dose related since higher doses of endotoxin (300 mu g LPS/mouse) significantly decreased [125I]IL-1alpha binding in both peripheral tissues and brain. Endotoxin induced modulation of the IL-1 system was also dependent on the treatment regimen since two low-dose LPS injections (at 0 and 12 h) increased IL-1beta concentrations and decreased [125I]IL-1alpha binding in both central and peripheral tissues. These data provide further support for a role for IL-1 in coordinating brain-endocrine-immune responses to stress and infection.