The influence of quinolones on electrically evoked pyramidal cell activity in the rat hippocampus in vitro was studied by using the slice technique. We hoped to learn more about the possible mechanisms for the development of side effects of different quinolones and to find a possible treatment. As reported earlier (W. Dimpfel, M. Spuler, A. Dalhoff, W. Hofmann, and G. Schluter, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 35:1142-1146, 1991), the amplitude of the population spike increased in the presence of ciprofloxacin, lomefloxacin, or ofloxacin about twofold in comparison with reference values. This increase could be prevented in a concentration-dependent manner by the concomitant presence of 3-amino-1-hydroxy-2-pyrrolidone (HA 966), a compound acting at the so-called glycine site of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, but not in the presence of aminophosphonovaleric acid (APV), which acts at a different recognition site of the NMDA receptor. Another tool, 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione, an antagonist of the so-called AMPA receptor (named after the binding of L-alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid [AMPA] to this site), could not antagonize the effect induced by the quinolones. Activation of the glycine site of the NMDA receptor induced by the presence of D-serine in the superfusion medium also resulted in a concentration-dependent increase in the population spike amplitude. This response remained unchanged in the presence of ciprofloxacin, whereas lomefloxacin and ofloxacin led to further increases in the amplitude, especially in the presence of higher concentrations of D-serine. These results also point to an involvement of the glycine site of the central NMDA receptor in the development of side effects by different quinolones. A complete attenuation of the quinolone-induced effects was obtained in the presence of 2.5 microM gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), a physiological neuromodulator which is marketed in some countries of Europe as a sedative. It is therefore concluded that the excitatory adverse effects of quinolones might be treated by the administration of GHB.