The limbic system-associated membrane protein (LAMP) is a 64-68 kDa neuronal surface glycoprotein expressed in cortical and subcortical regions of the limbic system of the adult and developing rat central nervous system (CNS). LAMP is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily of cell adhesion molecules with three Ig domains and is highly conserved between rat and human. In this study, the temporal and spatial pattern of lamp gene expression during fetal rat development was analyzed by using Northern blot analysis and in situ hybridization. In Northern blot analysis, two lamp mRNA transcripts, 1.6 kb and 8.0 kb, identical in size to those present in the adult rat nervous system, were detected in developing neural tissue. In situ hybridization analysis showed close correlation, though not identity, between the expression of lamp mRNAs and the distribution of LAMP in limbic regions of the developing rat CNS, indicative of a more complex regulation of gene expression than was previously thought to be the case. The expression of lamp mRNAs is first detected on about embryonic day (E) 13. The hybridization signal is not seen in the proliferative ventricular zone at any level of the neuraxis, indicating that lamp is expressed in postmitotic neurons. In the cerebral cortex, lamp mRNAs are expressed in limbic cortical regions, such as the perirhinal cortex, prefrontal cortex, and cingulate cortex. In the hippocampus, the hybridization signal is observed in Ammon's horn by E18. The neostriatum, amygdaloid complex, and most hypothalamic areas express lamp mRNAs from early stages (E13-E14) in a pattern consistent with the onset of neurogenesis. The emerging patterns of lamp expression at the outset are similar to those seen in adult hypothalamus and dorsal thalamus. Although the hybridization signal is observed in some nonlimbic areas, including midbrain and hindbrain structures, intense labeling is evident in more classic limbic regions. The high levels of expression of lamp in limbic regions, beginning in early developmental stages, combined with the results of previous functional in vitro and in vivo studies, support a role for LAMP as a recognition molecule involved in the formation of limbic connections.