Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) was the second member of the nerve growth factor (NGF) family to be isolated. The ability of BDNF to be retrogradely transported following intraparenchymal infusion represents a unique neurobiological tool to determine the location of putative neuron-specific BDNF-responsive neuronal systems. In the present study, we infused recombinant human (rh) BDNF into the rodent neo- and limbic cortex and used a turkey anti-BDNF antibody to determine specific populations of neurons which retrogradely transport this neurotrophin. Frontal cortex infusion retrogradely labeled neurons within the ipsilateral and contralateral frontal cortex, basal forebrain, lateral hypothalamus, centrolateral, mediodorsal, ventrolateral, ventromedial, ventral posterior, rhomboid, reuniens, and medial geniculate thalamic nuclei, and locus coeruleus. Occipital cortex infusion retrogradely labeled neurons in the frontal, temporal, occipital, and perirhinal cortices as well as the claustrum, basal forebrain, thalamus, epithalamus, hypothalamus, and raphe nuclei. Dorsal hippocampal infusion retrogradely labeled neurons within the septal diagonal band, supramammillary nucleus, and entorhinal cortex and was also transported within various hippocampal subfields. Entorhinal cortex infusion retrogradely labeled neurons within the perirhinal cortex, endopiriform nucleus, piriform cortex, dentate gyrus, presubiculum, parasubiculum, CA1-CA4 fields, amygdaloid nuclei, basal forebrain, thalamus, hypothalamus, periaqueductal gray, raphe nuclei, and locus coeruleus. Amygdala infusion labeled neurons in the endopiriform nucleus, temporal cortex, piriform cortex, paralimbic cortex, hippocampus, subiculum, entorhinal cortex, amygdala, basal forebrain, thalamus, hypothalamus, substantia nigra, pars compacta, raphe, and pontine parabrachial nuclei. In situ hybridization experiments demonstrated that virtually all areas which retrogradely transport BDNF also express its message. Neuroanatomical distributional studies of BDNF will unravel specific central nervous system neurotrophic-responsive systems.