Cognitive event-related potentials, such as P300, are sensitive to manipulations of psychological variables and may provide evidence to support theories of brain mechanisms involved in cognition. However, the relationship between event-related potentials and the active neural structures is not yet understood. Electrical stimulation of the index and little fingers of the left hand in the context of a somatosensory target discrimination task, performed by healthy human subjects, elicited the middle-latency component of somatosensory evoked potentials, N60, the long-latency component, N140, and the P300 component. Identification of the generators for both the earlier components and P300, using equivalent electrical dipole modeling, was performed. Individual spatiotemporal seven-dipole models were developed in order to suggest locations of the sources generating each subject's scalp-recorded wave forms. Three dipoles with fairly weak moments, located in the primary and secondary sensory areas, explained the middle- and long-latency somatosensory evoked potential components, and the remaining four dipoles (4-7), with stronger dipole moments, were active during P300. There was a clear temporal separation of dipole activity between the somatosensory evoked potential components and the P300 component. Dipoles 4 and 5 were found quite symmetrically in the parahippocampal areas of the two hemispheres, while dipoles 6 and 7 were slightly asymmetrical. Dipole 7 was found in the left hippocampal area. Dipole 6 appeared in the right insular cortex. The locations of the four dipoles implicated in the generation of the somatosensory P300 were compared with the locations of four dipoles accounting for the auditory evoked P300 described in our previous paper [Tarkka et al. (1995) Electroenceph. clin. Neurophysiol. 96, 538-545]. No substantial difference in source locations of the P300 was found between auditory and somatosensory modality other than an asymmetrical activity in the somatosensory modality contralateral to the stimulated hand.