1. Voltage-dependent outward currents in CA1 interneurons were studied with the use of whole cell voltage-clamp techniques. Tissue slices containing strata lacunosum-moleculare and radiatum (L-M-R regions) of the hippocampal CA1 region were prepared. Neurons were then isolated from these tissue slices with the use of an acute dissociation procedure. The morphologies of the isolated neurons were distinct from those of pyramidal cells and correlated with those of interneurons identified in the L-M-R regions after immunohistochemical stainings. 2. Total outward currents were elicited from the isolated cells by depolarization steps applied after a 300-ms hyperpolarization prepulse to 100 mV from a holding potential of 50 mV. Delayed outward currents were obtained by intercalating a 120-ms step at 55 mV between the hyperpolarizing prepulse and the depolarization. The intercalating step served to inactivate transient outward currents. Transient outward current were isolated by subtracting the delayed outward currents from the total outward currents. 3. Interneurons were subgrouped on the basis of their ability to produce transient outward current in response to the above protocol. 4. The two groups of interneurons possessed distinct morphological features. Cells producing transient outward currents had polygonal-shaped somata with thick primary processes that gave rise to smaller secondary processes at a short distance from the soma. Interneurons without activatable transient outward currents had somata that were not polygonal and they had more slender primary dendritic processes. 5. These results suggest that interneurons in the L-M-R regions can be divided into two groups on the basis of the presence or absence of voltage-dependent transient outward currents. The two groups of cells differentiated on this basis also have distinguishable morphological traits. The difference in the properties of the outward current may be a factor contributing to the variation in the firing pattern of recorded interneurons reported in previous studies.