The neuropeptide galanin coexists in the medial septum and diagonal band of Broca with a population of acetylcholine neurons which project mainly to the ventral hippocampus. The present studies investigated the role of ventral hippocampal galanin in spatial learning in the male rat using a spatial learning task. In addition, the effects of galanin on cholinergic function were monitored by in vivo microdialysis and high-performance liquid chromatography. Bilateral microinjections of galanin (3 nmol/ rat) via chronic cannulae placed into the ventral hippocampus (i.v.h.) produced a slight but significant impairment of acquisition of the spatial task, while the 1 nmol dose of galanin facilitated acquisition. The 6 nmol dose of galanin failed to affect performance. A trend for an impairment of long-term memory retention (examined seven days after the last training session) was observed after 3 nmol of galanin, while the 1 nmol dose facilitated retention performance. Scopolamine (0.1 mg/kg, s.c.) caused a marked impairment of acquisition. Galanin (3 nmol/rat) given i.v.h. failed to modify the acquisition impairment caused by scopolamine (0.1 mg/kg, s.c.). These results suggest that galanin given i.v.h. produces a biphasic dose-dependent effects on spatial learning. In freely moving rats, galanin (3 nmol/10 microliters) given into the lateral ventricle (i.c.v.) did not affect basal acetylcholine release. In contrast, perfusion (100 min) with galanin (0.1 or 0.3 nmol/1.25 microliters/min) through the ventral hippocampal probe resulted in a reduction of basal acetycholine release which was dose-dependent and reversible. Galanin given i.c.v. (3 nmol/10 microliters) or through the probe (0.3 nmol/1.25 microliters/min) attenuated the increase in acetylcholine release evoked by the muscarinic antagonist scopolamine (0.1 mg/kg, s.c.; 0.001 nmol/1.25 microliters/min through the probe). The galanin plus scopolamine combinations produced a 50% lower increase in the extracellular acetylcholine concentrations than scopolamine alone. This suggests that the mechanism(s) behind scopolamine- and galanin-induced stimulation of acetylcholine differ. These results indicate that ventral hippocampal galanin plays a role in cognition and that it has a powerful and modulatory effect on cholinergic transmission. However, the effects of exogenous galanin on spatial learning cannot be directly related to changes in in vivo cholinergic transmission in the ventral hippocampus. These discrepancies may relate to effects on subtypes of galanin receptors with different functional coupling. In addition, other hippocampal neurotransmitter systems (e.g. noradrenergic neurons) important for cognitive functions may also be modulated by ventral hippocampal galanin.