In situ hybridization histochemistry with somatostatin sst1-sst5 receptor messenger RNA-selective oligoprobes and quantitative receptor autoradiographic binding studies using [125I]Tyr3-octreotide, [Leu2,D-Trp22,125I-Tyr25]somatostatin-28 and [125I]CGP 23996 ([125I]c[Asn-Lys-Asn-Phe-Phe-Trp-Lys-Thr-Tyr-Thr-Ser]) were performed to determine the level of expression of somatostatin receptor messenger RNA and receptor binding sites in the hippocampal formation, limbic system and cerebral cortex of adult rats electrically kindled in the dorsal hippocampus. In control rats (implanted with electrodes but not electrically stimulated), the somatostatin-1 receptor-selective [125I]Tyr3-octreotide and the non-subtype-selective [Leu3,D-Trp22,125I-Tyr25]somatostatin-28 preferentially labelled the strata oriens and radiatum of the CA1 subfield of the hippocampus, the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus, the subiculum and presubiculum of the hippocampal formation, the inner layer of the frontal cortex, and the lateral and basolateral nuclei of the amygdala. The non-subtype-selective radioligand [125I]CGP 23996 (in 5 mM Mg2+ buffer) preferentially labelled the strata oriens and radiatum of the CA1 subfield of the hippocampus, the subiculum and the basolateral nucleus of the amygdala. Under conditions where primarily somatostatin-2 receptors were labelled, [125I]CGP 23996 (in 120 mM Na+ buffer) showed strong binding in the strata oriens and radiatum of the CA1 subfield of the hippocampus and the frontal cortex, whereas the dentate gyrus, subiculum and amygdala showed only weak signals. During and after kindling, no significant differences were observed between the ipsi- and contralateral sides of the hippocampus. A significant decrease (about 40%) of somatostatin receptor binding sites was observed in the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus with all radioligands (except [125I]CGP 23996 in Na+ buffer, which did not label this area) at stage 2 (pre-convulsive stage) and one week, but not one month, after stage 5 (generalized motor seizures). In contrast to somatostatin receptor binding, no alterations of the messenger RNA levels for sst1-sst5 receptors were found either at stage 2 or at stage 5. Similarly, no changes in receptor binding or messenger RNA levels were observed in the brain of rats which experienced a single afterdischarge. The present study shows a significant and selective decrease of somatostatin-1 receptor binding sites in the dentate gyrus of kindled rats. This is part of the plastic changes induced by kindling and may contribute to the increased sensitivity for the induction of generalized seizures during kindling.