The present study was conducted to demonstrate immunohistochemically, the sites of c-fos protein expression in the brains of mice subjected to acute and chronic social defeat stress. To induce social stress, mice were placed in situations of species-specific intermale aggression either only once or five times at 24 h intervals. Two hours after the single or fifth defeat stress, many c-fos immunoreactive neurons were observed in a variety of brain regions including the limbic system and sensory relay nuclei. The c-fos immunoreactive neurons in the brains of acute defeat mice decreased in number with time and the c-fos staining pattern of acute defeat mice became indistinguishable from that of normal control mice by 24 h after the single defeat stress. In contrast, chronic defeat stress induced persistent c-fos expression in the forebrain and brainstem even 24 h after the fifth defeat stress. In the forebrain of chronic defeat mice, the olfactory bulb, cingulate cortex, hippocampus, entire hypothalamus, septal nuclei and the amygdaloid complex, except for the central nucleus, were labeled intensely with c-fos antiserum. In the lower brainstem, nerve cells with c-fos immunoreactivity were seen mainly in ascending and descending sensory relay nuclei relevant to auditory and vestibular transmission, epicritic sensation (gracile and external cuneate nuclei), pain inhibition (central gray and raphe nuclei), and viscerosensory transmission (solitary tract nucleus). The differences in c-fos expression among the normal control, acute and chronic defeat mice were evaluated by an enumeration of the immunopositive neurons within each brain nucleus examined, and they were confirmed subsequently by statistical analysis. There was little c-fos expression in the nucleus putamen, lateral, ventral and posterior thalamic nuclei, pretectal nuclei, medial geniculate nucleus, red nucleus, substantia nigra, cerebellum, spinal cord, or cranial nerve nuclei. These findings suggest that chronic but not acute defeat stress causes persistent c-fos expression in more widespread brain regions than do any other stresses so far investigated. The present study may shed light on the central mechanisms by which behavioral abnormalities and/or chronic sociopsychological stress leads to the occurrence of abnormal behavior and/or psychosomatic disorders in experimental animals and humans.