The temporal/spatial dissemination of interictal spikes among different brain structures was studied during the course of kindling to determine if the long-term dissemination pattern reflects the rate and expression of kindling. The experiments were conducted on adult rabbits with chronically implanted electrodes (dorsal hippocampus, amygdala, caudate, all bilateral, sensory motor and occipital cortices). Rabbits (n = 13) were subjected to once daily electrical stimulation in the left hippocampus. Kindling resulted in the development of two different epileptic phenomena: 7 animals quickly (in 2-3 weeks) achieved a fully kindled state, characterized by generalized seizures, whereas the remaining 6 rabbits did not reliably progress beyond partial seizures even after more prolonged stimulation. Animals were accordingly divided into two groups referred to as generalized seizure and partial seizure. The temporal/spatial dissemination pattern, particularly in the two hippocampi, was very different between the groups. In both groups interictal spiking originated in one of the hippocampi independent of site stimulated and represented formation of the primary hippocampal epileptic focus. The generalized seizure group demonstrated stability of the primary hippocampal epileptic focus with permanent predominance of spiking in it over the course of kindling, and a high level of bilateral synchronous hippocampal interictal spiking. In the partial seizure group the primary hippocampal epileptic focus was established during the first 2-3 weeks of stimulation. This was later suppressed upon the development of an independent secondary focus in the opposite hippocampus. These animals also displayed very low levels of synchronous bilateral hippocampal interictal spiking. We suggest that an antagonistic relationship can develop between mirror hippocampal epileptic foci. This can be associated with a low level of bilateral hippocampal synchronous spiking, kindling retardation, and manifestation of partial seizures.