We have recently reported that a short-acting anesthetic and analgesic drug midazolam can produce analgesia and decrease morphine tolerance and dependence in the rat by interacting with the opioid system. This study was designed to investigate the effect of midazolam, morphine, and both together on beta-endorphin levels in the rat. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into four groups: (1) saline-saline; (2) saline-morphine; (3) midazolam-saline, and (4) midazolam-morphine groups. First, saline or midazolam injection was given IP and after 30 min a second injection of saline or morphine was given subcutaneously once daily for 11 days. Animals were sacrificed on 11th day 60 min after the last injection, to measure beta-endorphin by radioimmunoassay. Saline-morphine-treated animals showed a significant increase in beta-endorphin levels in the cortex, pons, medulla, lumbar spinal cord, adrenals, and spleen, and a decrease only in its level in pituitary. Midazolam-saline-treated animals showed a significant increase in beta-endorphin levels only in the medulla, and a decrease in its levels in hippocampus, striatum, and adrenals. Saline-morphine-treated animals did not show any changes in plasma beta-endorphin, but animals treated with midazolam-saline had a significant decrease in plasma beta-endorphin. In rats treated with morphine and midazolam together, beta-endorphin levels in cortex, lumbar spinal cord, and spleen decreased to the similar levels observed in rats treated with saline-saline; in pons and cervical spinal cord the levels were even lower than that found in saline-saline group. The decrease in pituitary beta-endorphin in morphine-midazolam-treated rats was due to morphine's own activity, whereas the decrease in plasma beta-endorphin in hippocampus in the morphine-midazolam group was a synergistic effect of morphine and midazolam. The beta-endorphin level in adrenal glands in the morphine-midazolam-treated animals was not different from that found in rats treated with morphine alone but was still higher than that in the saline-saline group. In general, it appears that chronic treatment with morphine stimulates the beta-endorphinergic system. A concomitant treatment with midazolam abolishes the stimulatory effect of morphine on the beta-endorphinergic system. These results may help us in understanding the intrinsic mechanisms involved in narcotic tolerance and dependence.