Soman (pinacolymethylphosphonofluoridate), a highly potent, irreversible inhibitor of cholinesterase, causes intense convulsions, neuropathology and, ultimately, death. There is evidence that certain brain structures are selectively vulnerable to the pathological consequences of soman-induced seizures. A working hypothesis is that central nervous system (CNS) structures with the earliest and most severe signs of neuropathology may be key sites for the initiation of the seizures. Fos, the immediate-early gene product, increases rapidly in several animal seizure models. Thus, we reasoned that the earliest brain regions to express Fos might be involved in the initiation and maintenance of soman-induced convulsions. To assess this, rats were injected with a single, convulsive dose of soman (77.7 micrograms/kg, i.m.). The animals were euthanized and processed for immunocytochemical analysis at several time points. Robust Fos expression was seen in layer II of the piriform cortex and the noradrenergic nucleus locus coeruleus within 30-45 minutes. One hour following soman injection, staining was more intense in the piriform cortex layer II and in the locus coeruleus. In addition, Fos was evident in the piriform cortex layer III, the entorhinal cortex, the endopiriform nucleus, the olfactory tubercle, the anterior olfactory nucleus and the main olfactory bulb. By 2 hours, Fos staining was present throughout the cerebral cortex, thalamus, caudate-putamen and the hippocampus. At 8 hours and beyond, Fos expression returned to control levels throughout the CNS except for the piriform cortex and the locus coeruleus which still had robust labeling. By 24 hours, neuropathology was evident throughout the rostral-caudal extent of layer II of the piriform cortex. The rapid induction of Fos in the piriform cortex and the locus coeruleus, taken together with previous anatomical, eletrophysiological and neurochemical studies, suggests that prolonged, excessive exposure to synaptically released acetylcholine and norepinephrine triggers the production of soman-induced seizures initially in the piriform cortex and subsequently in other cortical and subcortical structures.