Neurons in the piriform cortex and the pontine nucleus locus coeruleus express elevated levels of the immediate early gene protein product, Fos, within 30-45 minutes of a seizurogenic dose of the anticholinesterase, soman (Zimmer et al., [1997] J. Comp. Neurol. 378:468-481). By 24 hours following soman injection, there is marked neuropathology in the piriform cortex. These findings suggest selective, regional vulnerability in response to the seizurogenic actions of soman. In the present study, we determined that soman-induced seizures also cause selective, rapid activation of astrocytes and microglia in the piriform cortex and other brain regions. Animals were killed at different intervals between 1 hour and 24 hours after a convulsive dose of soman. Brain sections were processed for immunocytochemical detection of astrocytes with antibodies against glial fibrillary acidic protein, and microglia and macrophages with antibodies against the complement receptor 3 protein, OX-42. The results demonstrate that following soman administration: (1) there is a rapid increase in glial fibrillary acidic protein staining in astrocytes of the piriform cortex (1 hour); (ii) reactive astrocytes are specifically restricted to layer II and the superficial boundaries of layer III of the piriform cortex. These are the same layers in which neurons express Fos within 30-45 minutes following soman administration; (3) between 1 and 4 hours, resting (ramified) microglia in the piriform cortex and the hippocampus alter their morphology to resemble active microglia. From 4-8 hours, active microglia undergo morphological changes characteristic of reactive microglia that resemble macrophages. Taken together, these observations indicate that astrocytes and microglia in brain regions susceptible to soman become rapidly "reactive" in response to seizures. The highly specific anatomical codistribution of reactive glia and Fos-expressing neurons suggests that intensely active neurons provide local signals that trigger reactive changes in neighboring glia.