Ciliary neurotrophic factor is a pleiotropic molecule thought to have multiple functions in the developing and adult nervous system. To investigate the role of ciliary neurotrophic factor in the developing and mature brain by defining putative target cells the expression of the ligand-binding alpha-subunit of the ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor was studied in neonatal and adult rat brains using a digoxygenin-labelled probe for in situ hybridization. Neuronal populations expressing ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor-alpha messenger RNA were found in many functionally diverse brain areas including the olfactory bulb (mitral cells and other neurons) neocortex (layer V) and other cortical areas (pyramidal cell layers in the piriform cortex and hippocampus, granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus) and distinct nuclei in the thalamus, hypothalamus and brainstem. In the latter, reticular nuclei and both cranial motor and sensory nerve nuclei showed intense hybridization signals in the neonatal brain. The nucleus ruber, substantia nigra pars reticularis, deep cerebellar nuclei and a subpopulation of cells in the internal granular layer of the cerebellum were also labelled. In many areas (e.g. in thalamic, midbrain and pontine nuclei) ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor-alpha expression became undetectable with maturation; however, there were other areas (e.g., olfactory bulb, cerebral cortex and hypothalamus) where expression was higher in the adult. The neuroepithelium of the neonatal rat displayed a highly selective expression of ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor-alpha in areas which are known to exhibit high rates of postnatal cell proliferation in the germinal zones. Generally, neurons which have been reported to respond to exogenous ciliary neurotrophic factor were labelled by the ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor-alpha probe. This was not the case, however, for striatal and septal neurons. The results of this study suggest that ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor-alpha ligands have even broader functions than previously thought, acting on different neuronal populations in the developing and mature brain, respectively.