The aim of this study was to describe the normal distribution of the water content in several regions of the rat brain and furthermore to determine if global ischemia results in a variable increase in water content in these regions. Water content was determined in 40 regions; in 8 unaffected brains by gravimetry and in 9 unaffected brains by estimation of the wet/dry weight ratio. In addition, 6 rats underwent 6 h of moderate global brain ischemia in order to evaluate the sensitivity of the investigated brain areas to develop a cytotoxic brain edema. The impermeability of the blood-brain barrier to proteins was evaluated by staining with Evans blue. Physiological differences in water content between the several brain regions ranged from 72.57 +/- 0.77% (mean +/- S.D.) in the medulla oblongata to 84.83 +/- 0.52% in the hypothalamus. Generally, the water content of the grey matter was higher than that of the white matter and increased from the frontal to the occipital and from the parietal to the basal cortex. Even adjacent cortical regions showed differences in the amount of brain water of up to 3.41%. In the ischemic animals, the impermeability of the blood-brain barrier to proteins was not compromised, but an increase in the amount of brain water was found in the frontoparietal cortex of 1.17 +/- 0.37% and hippocampus of 1.49 +/- 0.39% (P < 0.05). This ischemic increase in the brain water content was small in comparison to the normal variance in regional brain water content. Similar results were obtained by determining the wet/dry weight ratio and by gravimetry. Gravimetry led to more consistent results. In conclusion, the study shows great differences in normal water content between the several brain areas in comparison to an only slight increase of water content due to the development of cytotoxic brain edema. The determination of an early state of an increased brain water content requires an adequate and differentiated measurement of different brain areas. The gravimetry fulfills this demand.