Neuroanatomical methods have been used to study selective vulnerability after global brain ischemia. A consistent pattern of ischemic neuronal damage is found in the rodent hippocampus with loss of CA1 neurons and of some cells in the hilus of the dentate gyrus. Very little is known about plastic changes that would be expected in ischemia-resistant areas such as CA3 neurons and granule cells. Neuronal plasticity after lesions may be indicated by changes in labeling with antibodies to the growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43). Expression of GAP-43 as a marker for neuronal plasticity was studied here in the hippocampus after global brain ischemia. Halothane-anesthetized rats were subjected to 20 min of transient forebrain ischemia using four-vessel occlusion. In situ hybridization was used to study GAP-43 mRNA at 1, 3, 6, and 12 h and at 1, 3, and 7 days after ischemia. Immunostaining was carried out with two different antibodies to GAP-43 in brains which were perfusion-fixed after 1, 2, 4, and 7/8 days. In the control hippocampus, GAP-43 mRNA was localized to CA1-CA3 and the hilus. Moderate increases in cellular signals were seen in hilar cells and granule cells early after ischemia, and some changes occurred in CA3 at late stages. Hybridization was lost in CA1 due to cell death. With immunostaining, GAP-43 was not seen in the cytoplasm of neurons, whereas dense labeling occurred in a differentiated pattern in the axonal and dendritic layers. At 1 day after ischemia, neurons in the hilus of the dentate gyrus and in the stratum pyramidale and lucidum of CA3 showed strong cytoplasmic labeling for GAP-43. Few cells were labeled in these regions at 2 days, and none at later stages. Pyramidal cells in CA1 and CA3 areas and granule cells were never labeled. These studies demonstrate a transient expression of GAP-43 mRNA and protein in a subset of vulnerable neurons after transient brain ischemia. The cytoplasmic localization in hilar neurons could be due to increased synthesis of GAP-43 or to changes in axoplasmic transport. It is suggested that axonal damage occurs in hilar cells which stimulates GAP-43 expression. The increased production of trophic factors after ischemia in granule cells could also cause plastic changes in hilar cells. Since hilar neurons are in a strategic position to control the excitability of the dentate area, increased expression of GAP-43 may indicate an important pathophysiological process. In seizure experiments, strong expression of GAP-43 mRNA in granule cells was associated with abnormal mossy fiber sprouting and development of chronic epilepsy. The relevance of the minor GAP-43 mRNA upregulation after ischemia must be considered. The changes in CA3 neurons at several days after ischemia might represent a plastic response to a loss of CA1 neurons.