To determine the contribution of the hippocampus in the processing of a configural positive patterning discrimination (PPD) task, discrimination between reinforced presentations of a tone plus light compound stimulus and nonreinforced presentations of each of its components (TL+/T-,L-) was examined using a conditioned-suppression paradigm. In the first experiment, rats demonstrated a rapid acquisition of the PPD with an appropriate discriminative responding. Rats submitted to posttraining hippocampal lesions (using multiple injections of ibotenic acid) were no longer able to master correctly the previously solved discrimination, demonstrating significant differences in their response rates during the 2 never-reinforced elemental stimulus presentations. In Experiment II, lesioned rats were not able to correctly learn the PPD, demonstrating the same pattern of responding as in Experiment I. These rats were also severely disrupted in a radial maze elimination task. Experiment IIIa indicated that, in a simple conditioning task (T+, L+), normal rats acquired a rapid conditioned suppression for both stimuli, with the tone being slightly more susceptible to conditioning than the light stimulus. In Experiment IIIb, conditioning to the compound tone plus light stimulus led to a clear conditioning to the tone and almost no conditioning to the light, suggesting an overshadowing from the tone to the light. Similar results were obtained in rats with hippocampal lesions. These results strongly suggest that the disruption showed by rats with hippocampal lesions in the PPD task cannot be due to an alteration of the relative salience of the stimulus. The inability of rats with hippocampal lesions to solve correctly the PPD is due to difficulties in eliminating responding to some unimportant events of the situation, reflecting a deficit in selective attention processes rather than in an ability to process configural stimuli. In the discussion, the putative role of the hippocampus in selective attentional processes is more fully discussed.