Audiogenic seizures, a model of brainstem epilepsy, are characterized by a tonic phase (sustained muscular contraction fixing the limbs in a flexed or extended position) associated with a short cortical electroencephalogram flattening. When sound-susceptible rats are exposed to repeated acoustic stimulations, kindled audiogenic seizures, characterized by a clonic phase (facial and forelimb repetitive jerks) associated with cortical spike-waves, progressively appear, suggesting that repetition of brainstem seizures causes a propagation of the epileptic discharge toward the forebrain. In order to determine the structures through which this propagation occurs, four kinds of experiments were performed in non-epileptic rats and in sound-susceptible rats exposed to single or repeated sound stimulations. The following results were obtained: (I) Electrical amygdalar kindling was similar in non-epileptic and naive-susceptible rats, but was facilitated in sound-susceptible rats submitted to 40 acoustic stimulations and presenting kindled audiogenic seizures. (2) Audiogenic seizures induced an increase in [(14)C]2-deoxyglucose concentration in the amygdala after a single seizure, and in the amygdala, hippocampus and perirhinal and piriform cortices after a kindled audiogenic seizure. (3) A single audiogenic seizure induced the expression of c-Fos protein mainly in the auditory nuclei. A few cells were stained in the amygdala. After 5-10 audiogenic seizures, a clear staining appeared in the amygdala, and perirhinal and piriform cortices. The hippocampus expressed c-Fos later, after 40 audiogenic seizures. (4) Injection of lidocaine into the amygdala did not modify single audiogenic seizures, but suppressed myoclonias and cortical spike-waves of kindled audiogenic seizures. Similar deactivation of the hippocampus failed to modify kindled audiogenic seizures. Taken together, these data indicate a critical role for the amygdala in the spread of audiogenic seizures from brainstem to forebrain.