Previous data showed the development of tolerance to a variety of pharmacological effects of plant and synthetic cannabinoids when administered chronically. This tolerance phenomenon has been related both to enhancement of cannabinoid metabolism and, in particular, to down-regulation of brain CB1 cannabinoid receptors, although this has been only demonstrated in extrapyramidal areas. In the present study, we have tested, by using autoradiographic analysis of CB1 receptor binding combined with analysis of CB1 receptor mRNA levels in specific brain regions by Northern blot, whether the reduction in binding levels of CB1 receptors observed in extrapyramidal areas after a chronic exposure to delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta9-THC), also occurs in most brain areas that contain these receptors. Results were as follows. The acute exposure to delta9-THC usually resulted in no changes in the specific binding of CB1 receptors in all brain areas studied, discarding a possible interference in binding kinetic of the pre-bound administered drug. The only exceptions were the substantia nigra pars reticulata and the cerebral cortex, which exhibited decreased specific binding after the acute treatment with delta9-THC presumably due to an effect of the pre-bound drug. The specific binding measured in animals chronically (5 days) exposed to delta9-THC decreased ranging from approximately 20 up to 60% of the specific binding measured in control animals in all brain areas. Areas studied included cerebellum (molecular layer), hippocampus (CA1, CA2, CA3, CA4 and dentate gyrus), basal ganglia (medial and lateral caudate-putamen and substantia nigra pars reticulata), limbic nuclei (nucleus accumbens, septum nucleus and basolateral amygdaloid nucleus), superficial (CxI) and deep (CxVI) layers of the cerebral cortex and others. There were only two brain regions, the globus pallidus and the entopeduncular nucleus, where the specific binding for CB receptors was unaltered after 5 days of a daily delta9-THC administration. In addition, we have analyzed the levels of CB1 receptor mRNA in specific brain regions of animals chronically exposed to delta9-THC, in order to correlate them with changes in CB1 receptor binding. Thus, we observed a significant increase in CB1 receptor mRNA levels, but only in the striatum, with no changes in the hippocampus and cerebellum. In summary, CB1 receptor binding decreases after chronic delta9-THC exposure in most of the brain regions studied, although this was not accompanied by parallel decreases in CB receptor mRNA levels. This might indicate that the primary action of delta9-THC would be on the receptor protein itself rather than on the expression of CB1 receptor gene. In this context, the increase observed in mRNA amounts for this receptor in the striatum should be interpreted as a presumably compensatory effect to the reduction in binding levels observed in striatal outflow nuclei.