Many neurotransmitters and hormones in the nervous system transmit signals through receptors coupled to the poly-phosphoinositide (PI) signaling pathway. In this study, an in vivo protocol with [3H]inositol was used to examine the effect of chronic ethanol administration on inositol metabolism and poly-PI turnover in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum of mouse brain. C57BL/6 mice were given a nutritionally complete liquid diet containing either ethanol (5%, w/v) or isocaloric sucrose for 2 months. Mice were injected intracerebrally with [3H]inositol; after 16 or 24 hr, they were injected intraperitoneally with lithium (8 mEq/kg body weight) to inhibit the inositol monophosphatase (IP1) activity. All mice were decapitated 4 hr after lithium injection. Labeled inositol phospholipids accounted for 16 to 23% of total labeled inositol in different regions of control mouse brain, and the percentages in the hippocampus were consistently higher than the cerebral cortex and cerebellum. In control mice, the percentages of labeled IP1 after a 4-hr lithium treatment were 11.5%, 9.9%, and 3.7% for cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum, respectively. Chronic ethanol feeding resulted in a significant (p < 0.05) decrease in the percent of labeled IP1 and inositol phospholipids, and this effect was observed in the cerebral cortex and, to a lesser extent, hippocampus but not cerebellum. When ratios of labeled IP1 were expressed against labeled inositol phospholipids as an index of the poly-PI turnover activity, significant decreases in IP/lipid ratios were observed in the cerebral cortex, but not the hippocampus or cerebellum. Although mice killed 24 + 4 hr after the last ethanol feeding would have experienced an 8-hr period of ethanol withdrawal, compared with the 16 + 4-hr group, no differences in IP/lipid ratios were observed between the two time groups. These results illustrate regional differences in the effect of chronic ethanol on inositol metabolism in the brain, but no difference in poly-PI turnover in brain due to ethanol withdrawal.