Entorhinal cortex lesion (ECL) leads to anterograde degeneration of perforant path axons and is known to induce a rapid and intense reaction of astrocytes and microglial cells in the deafferented dentate gyrus. Phagocytosis of degenerating axons involves the establishment and maintenance of cell-matrix and cell-cell interactions by activated glial cells. It was thus our aim to investigate whether the process of axon phagocytosis is accompanied by the expression of adhesion molecules on activated microglial cells or reactive astrocytes, as such molecules mediate bot cell-matrix and cell-cell interactions. We found that the integrin adhesion molecules leukocyte function antigen-1 (LFA-1), very late antigen-4 (VLA-4), and the ligand for LFA-1, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), were expressed on microglial cells accumulating in the outer molecular layer of the deafferented dentate gyrus. This upregulation of adhesion molecule expression on microglial cells showing morphological criteria of activation occurred rapidly following ECL, reached its peak at 3 days post lesion (dpl), and gradually returned to control levels after 9 dpl. Astrocytes were never labeled by antibodies directed against these adhesion molecules. Prelabeling of the perforant path with a fluorescent tracer and subsequent ECL led to phagocytosis of fluorescent-labeled axonal debris by cells that were located in the outer molecular layer and showed typical microglial morphology. Double-fluorescence labeling demonstrated that microglial cells engaged in the phagocytosis of axonal debris expressed LFA-1, VLA-4, and the LFA-1-ligand ICAM-1. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that anterograde degeneration of perforant path axons results in adhesion molecule expression on activated microglial cells engaged in axon phagocytosis. The expression of such molecules could represent a mechanism that retains activated microglia in areas of axonal degeneration and perhaps enables the interaction of microglial cells with each other or with other immunocompetent cells.