structural abnormalities of the cerebral cortex in schizophrenia have been revealed by magnetic resonance imaging, although it is not clear whether these abnormalities are diffuse or local. We predicted that changes in cortical structure would result in abnormalities in biochemical markers for the glutamate system in post-mortem brain, and that the pattern of neurochemical abnormalities would be a clue to the distribution and extent of pathology. A number of studies have now reported increases in biochemical and other markers of glutamatergic cell bodies and terminals in the frontal cortex in schizophrenia. These findings are consistent with the presence of an abnormally abundant glutamatergic innervation, which may be due to an arrest in the normal developmental process of synaptic elimination. In the anterior temporal cortex and hippocampus there is evidence of an asymmetric loss of glutamate terminals, and of reduced GABA function, which may be secondary to the glutamatergic deficit. Glutamate cell body markers are spared in the temporal lobe; we argue that the loss of glutamate uptake sites may reflect the loss of an extrinsic glutamatergic innervation of the polar temporal cortex which arises from the frontal cortex. These fronto-temporal projections may be vulnerable because they arise from a cytoarchitecture which has not been stabilized by remodelling during early post-natal life. There have been several therapeutic studies of drugs with actions on brain glutamate systems. Based on the glutamate deficiency theories, one approach has been to enhance glutamatergic function using agonists of the N-methyl-D-aspartate-linked glycine site. However, there are no clear therapeutic effects, and some studies report aggravation of positive symptoms. This might be expected if, as part of our post-mortem studies suggested, there is excess glutamatergic innervation in some brain regions in schizophrenia. There is neuropsychological evidence that frontal abnormalities in schizophrenia may be genetically determined. We found that first degree relatives of schizophrenic patients were selectively impaired in tests of frontal lobe function, whereas both frontal and temporal function is impaired in patients We conclude that the genetic predisposition to schizophrenia involves impaired frontal lobe function. Psychotic symptoms develop only when a second process results in a loss of fronto-temporal projections and leads to temporal lobe dysfunction.