Signal propagation from mossy fibers to CA1 neurons was investigated in rat hippocampal slices by a combination of electrical and optical recordings. The slices were prepared by oblique sectioning of the middle part of the hippocampus to preserve fiber connections. The mossy fibers were stimulated to induce population spikes (PSs) and excitatory postsynaptic potentials in the middle part of the CA1 region. Latencies of maximal PSs in CA1 varied widely among slices; they ranged from 7 to 13.5 ms, with two maxima at 9 and 11.5 ms. The fastest PSs probably are evoked by the Schaffer collaterals that connect the CA3 and CA1 regions in the well-known trisynaptic circuit. However, the slower PSs suggest the existence of additional delayed inputs. To determine the source of the delayed input, slices were stained with a voltage-sensitive dye, RH482, and the optical signals relevant to membrane potential changes were detected by a high-resolution optical imaging system. Optical recording of responses to mossy fiber stimulation indicated two distinct types of signal propagation from CA3 to CA1. In preparations evincing the fast type of propagation, signals spread to CA1 within 7.2 ms after the mossy fiber stimulation. During such propagation, activity flowed directly from CA3 to the stratum radiatum of CA1. Other preparations illustrated slow signal propagation, in which optical signals were generated in CA2 before spreading to CA1. During such slow signal transmission, activity persisted in CA2 and its surrounding area for 3 ms before propagating to the strata radiatum and oriens in CA1. In such cases, CA1 activity was detected within 10.8 ms of mossy fiber stimulation. In some slices, a mixture of the fast and slow propagation patterns was observed, indicating that these two transmission modes can coexist. Our data reveal that CA2 neurons can transmit delayed excitatory signals to CA1 neurons. We therefore conclude that consideration of electrical signal propagation through the hippocampus should include flow through the CA2 region in addition to the traditional dentate gyrus-CA3-CA1 trisynaptic circuit.