Hypothermia is known to be the most effective method to protect the neuronal damage induced by ischemia. In the present study, we investigated the histopathological consequences of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons as well as the glial reactions in the hippocampus, after diverse periods of ischemic insult at graded intra-ischemic hypothermia ranging from 32 to 20 degrees C. Gerbils were exposed to forebrain ischemia by clamping the bilateral common carotid arteries for 5-120 min depending upon the temperatures. The morphological study was performed 7 days after ischemia or sham-operation. Histopathological evaluation of delayed neuronal death (DND) was performed by Cresyl violet (CV) staining and MAP2 immunoreactivity. Glial reactions were examined by GFAP immunostaining and isolectin B4 histochemistry, corresponding to astrocytes and microglia, respectively. The forebrain ischemia at 32 degrees C for 10 min and at 28 degrees C for 20 min did not induce DND in the CA1 region. However, the ischemia at 32 degrees C for 20 min and at 28 degrees C for 30 min caused extensive degeneration of CA1 pyramidal neurons as observed in normothermic ischemic animals. Under the condition of deep hypothermia, the ischemia for 60 min at 24 degrees C and for 120 min at 20 degrees C which were the longest durations of each temperature within the limitation of the animal survival following 7 days, induced no DND in CA1 pyramidal neurons. The reactive changes of astrocytes were observed not only in ischemic animals with DND, but also in ischemic animals without DND. Computer image analysis showed that the area fraction of GFAP-positive structures in the CA1 region was significantly increased in both ischemic cases with and without DND compared with each sham group. In contrast, the distribution of activated microglia was much more restricted to the CA1 region and they were always accompanied by DND at 7 days postischemia. The present results demonstrate the remarkable neuroprotective effect of deep hypothermia that has been widely used in cardiovascular surgeries as the cerebroprotective strategy during total circulatory cessation. The findings also suggest that even under the condition of hypothermia, glial reactions may play an important role in neuronal survival and death after ischemia.