Neuropeptide Y (NPY) potently inhibits glutamate-mediated synaptic transmission in areas CA1 and CA3 of the rat hippocampus without affecting other synaptic inputs onto principal cells of the hippocampal formation, suggesting that its biological role may include the regulation of excitability within the hippocampus. Here we examine NPY's actions in three in vitro models of epilepsy [0 Mg2+-, picrotoxin-, and stimulus-train-induced bursting (STIB)] with the use of extracellular and whole cell patch-clamp recordings from rat hippocampal-entorhinal cortex slices. Perfusion of the slice with saline that had Mg2+ omitted (0 Mg2+) or that had picrotoxin (100 microM) added resulted in brief spontaneous bursts (SBs) resembling interictal discharges. SB frequency is significantly reduced in both models by 1 microM NPY and by the Y2-preferring agonists peptide (P)YY(3-36) (1 microM) and 1-4-(6-aminohexanoic acid)-25-36 ([ahx(5-24)] NPY; 3 microM). The Y1-preferring agonist Leu31-Pro34NPY (1 microM) is considerably less potent, but also reduces burst frequency, even in the presence of the selective Y1 receptor antagonist GR231118, suggesting the involvement of a different receptor. In STIB, high-frequency stimulus trains to stratum radiatum of area CA2/CA3 result in clonic or tonic-clonic ictaform primary afterdischarges (primary ADs) as well as longer, spontaneous secondary ictaform discharges and SBs similar to those in the other models. Primary AD duration is greatly reduced or abolished by Y2- but not Y1-preferring agonists. SBs, although variable, were inhibited by both Y1 and Y2 agonists. In single and dual whole cell recordings from CA3 pyramidal cells, we frequently observed spontaneous, rhythmic synchronous events (SRSEs) arising after several STIB stimuli. Once established, SRSEs persist in the absence of further stimuli and are insensitive to the application of NPY. SRSEs in pyramidal cells typically occur at 2-4 Hz, are outward currents when cells are clamped near rest (>100 pA at a holding potential of -55 mV), reverse between -60 and -70 mV, and are inhibited by 100 microM picrotoxin, indicating involvement of gamma-aminobutyric acid-A receptors. They are inhibited by blockers of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) but not N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. Whole cell patch-clamp recordings from interneurons in CA3 after STIB reveal NPY-insensitive, rhythmic, inward AMPA-receptor-mediated currents that are similar in frequency to SRSEs seen in pyramidal cells. We conclude that NPY, acting predominantly via Y2 receptors, can dramatically inhibit epileptiform activity in three fundamentally different in vitro models of epilepsy without affecting endogenous inhibitory activity. The results also provide support for the hypothesis that endogenous NPY may normally control excitability in the hippocampus and suggest the potential for NPY receptors as targets for anticonvulsant therapy.