Persistent hyperexcitability follows synchronized bursting induced in the CA3 region of hippocampal slices by perfusion with high concentrations (2000 IU/ml) of the GABAA antagonist, penicillin. This hyperexcitable state is characterized by: i) slow recovery from bursting following penicillin washout; ii) persistent "post-burst" field potential oscillations and iii) increased probability of spontaneous bursting with ordinarily sub-convulsant doses of GABAA antagonists. An N-methyl-D-aspartate-independent type of long-term potentiation of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA)/kainate excitatory postsynaptic potentials occurred following bursting. However, similar increases in excitatory postsynaptic potential magnitude also occurred after a subconvulsant dose of penicillin (500 IU/ml) which did not produce the other features of persistent hyperexcitability. Furthermore, long-term potentiation either increased or remained stable after bursting stopped, whereas, post-burst oscillations gradually diminished with time. Low doses of the AMPA/kainate antagonist, 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione, which restored the potentiated excitatory postsynaptic potentials to control levels, reduced but did not eliminate the post-burst oscillation. Tetanus-induced long-term potentiation did not reproduce the hyperexcitable state seen after bursting. These findings indicate that the epileptiform bursting caused by blocking GABAA-mediated inhibition induces long-term potentiation which is partially responsible for persistent burst-induced hyperexcitability but is not sufficient to entirely explain it. The hippocampus which is critical for normal memory is also frequently the generator of intractable epileptic seizures. Seizure-like discharges in the hippocampus induced long-lasting increases in synaptic efficacy similar to those thought to underlie normal memory. This form of long-term potentiation contributed to the network oscillations characteristics of the hyperexcitable state persisting after epileptiform activity but was not sufficient to entirely explain them. Epileptic seizures may engage normal memory mechanisms which increase neuronal excitability and predispose the hippocampal network to further seizures. This may, in part, account for the propensity for hippocampal seizure foci to become intractable.