Septal nuclei are suggested to work as an interface between the hippocampal formation, involved in higher cognitive functions, and the hypothalamus, involved in motivational behaviors such as feeding, drinking, and intracranial self-stimulation. In the present study, to elucidate a role of the septal nuclei in motivational behaviors, single neuron activity was recorded from water- and food-deprived monkeys during discrimination of objects associated with juice, and during ingestion of juice. Of 349 neurons recorded from two monkeys, 67 responded in the ingestion phase of the object discrimination task. Of these 67 neurons, 31 were further tested with the noncontingent liquid (juice or water) test in which liquid was provided until the animals became satiated. These 31 septal neurons were classified into two groups: type I neurons (n = 10) responded to juice ingestion with inhibition, and type II neurons (n = 21) responded with excitation. The spontaneous firing rates of the type I neurons were higher in the deprived condition and decreased as the animal became satiated by intake of liquid. Nine type II neurons responded to the sight of a white object associated with juice as well as ingestion of juice. The response magnitudes of the type II neurons to both the sight of the white object and ingestion of juice also decreased by satiation. However, spontaneous firing rates of the type II neurons did not change. These activity changes of both type I and II neurons were well correlated with changes in motivational state of the monkey estimated by the behavioral test. The results suggest that the activity of type I neurons reflects thirst or hunger drive levels, and that responses of type II neurons are related to reward perception. These type I and II neurons were located mainly in the anterior part of the septal nuclei. Results of the present study suggest, along with previous lesion and anatomical studies, that the septal nuclei exert a powerful influence on the motivational/drive systems through the projection to the hypothalamus.