Ionic mechanisms of spontaneous GABAergic events in rat hippocampal slices exposed to 4-aminopyridine. J. Neurophysiol. 78: 2582-2591, 1997. Ion-selective (H+ and K+) microelectrode techniques as well as conventional extra- and intracellular recordings were used to study the ionic mechanisms of propagating spontaneous GABAergic events (SGEs) in rat hippocampal slices exposed to 4-aminopyridine (4-AP, 50-100 mu M). All experiments were made in the presence of antagonists of ionotropic glutamate receptors [10 mu M 6-nitro-7-sulphamoylbenzoquinoxaline-2,3-dione (NBQX) and 40 mu M -2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid (AP5)]. The SGEs were composed of a negative-going change in field potential with a temporally coincident increase (0.7 +/- 0.3 mM; mean +/- SE) in extracellular K+ ([K+]o) and an alkaline transient (0.01-0.08 units) in extracellular pH (pHo) in stratum radiatum of the area CA1. Simultaneous intracellular recordings showed a triphasic hyperpolarization-depolarization-late hyperpolarization response in pyramidal cells. Application of pentobarbital sodium (PB, 100 mu M) decreased the interval between SGEs from a mean value of 35 to approximately 20 s and shortened the period of refractoriness of stimulus-evoked propagating events. This was accompanied by an increase in the amplitude of the field potential response of the [K+]o and the pHo shifts and of the depolarizing phase of the pyramidal-cell response. The SGEs were completely blocked by the gamma-aminobutyric acid-A (GABAA) receptor antagonist, picrotoxin (PiTX; 100 mu M). The amplitudes of the negative-going field potential and of the depolarizing phase of the pyramidal-cell response as well as the ionic shifts associated with SGEs were strongly suppressed in the nominal absence of CO2/HCO-3. There was a five-fold increase in the interevent interval, and propagating SGEs could not be evoked by stimuli given at intervals shorter than approximately 2-3 min. Exposure to inhibitors of carbonic anhydrase, benzolamide (BA; 10 micro M) or ethoxyzolamide (EZA; 50 mu M) fully blocked the alkaline pHo transients and turned them into acid shifts. The poorly membrane-permeant BA had no discernible effect on the other components of the SGEs, but application of EZA had effects reminiscent to those of CO2/HCO-3-free medium. Addition of the GABAA receptor-permeant weak-acid anion, formate (20 mM) reestablished the SGEs that were first suppressed by exposure to the CO2/HCO-3-free medium. No SGEs were seen in the presence of a similar concentration of the GABAA receptor-impermeant anion propionate. Unlike the alkaline transients associated with HCO-3-driven SGEs, those supported by formate were not blocked by BA. The present data suggest that an inward current carried by bicarbonate is necessary for the generation of SGEs and that the GABAA receptor-mediated excitatory coupling among GABAergic interneurons is essentially dependent on the availability of intracellular bicarbonate.