Previous data indicated that infusions of the D2/D3 dopamine receptor antagonist sulpiride within the perifornical region of the lateral hypothalamus may engage neural circuitry relevant to activation of the mesoaccumbens dopamine projection. The present work examined this proposition further. Experiment 1 examined the ability of intra-perifornical sulpiride to induce a conditioned place preference, using an unbiased conditioning procedure. Thus, bilateral guide cannulae were implanted to gain access to the perifornical region of the lateral hypothalamus. Following recovery, animals were subjected to an initial exposure to the place preference apparatus. The apparatus consisted of three distinctive compartments, the central compartment allowing access to the two outermost compartments. Initial exposure indicated equal preference for each. Then, in alternating sessions, animals received infusions of sulpiride (5, 10 or 20 micrograms) before being placed in one of the two outermost compartments, and infusions of vehicle before being placed in the alternate compartment. Compartment-drug pairings were counterbalanced across animals. Four drug, and four saline sessions were completed, each being separated by at least 2 full days. On the final test day, animals were allowed free access to compartments, and the time spent in each was compared with that of initial exposure. Results showed that intra-perifornical sulpiride increased activity during drug-conditioning sessions in an incremental fashion, and supported dose-dependently the acquisition of a conditioned place preference. Experiment 2 examined the effects of isolation rearing upon the locomotor stimulant properties of intra-perifornical sulpiride, and the acquisition of a conditioned place preference. Rats were raised from weaning either alone (isolation-reared) or in groups of five (socially-reared controls) until 4 months of age. Consistent with previous reports of the effects of isolation rearing upon psychomotor stimulant responsivity, here isolates were found to be more responsive to the locomotor stimulant properties of intra-perifornical sulpiride, but were less responsive to the ability of intra-perifornical sulpiride to support the acquisition of a conditioned place preference. These data were suggested to provide further support for the proposition that blockade of dopamine receptors of the D2 family within the perifornical region of the lateral hypothalamus results in the activation of the mesoaccumbens dopamine projection, via the ventral tegmental area.