The NMDA receptor subtype is the major excitatory mediator for glutamate neurotoxicity. To assess its participation in the noxious effects of postnatal hypoxia, we have characterized the binding of the ionophoric marker of NMDA receptor, dizocilpine (MK-801). Binding of (+)-3-[125I]MK-801 to NMDA brain receptors under nonequilibrium conditions was quantified by in vitro autoradiography in rats exposed to hypoxia induced by 93% N2/6.5% O2 exposure for 70 min on Postnatal Day 4. Acute and long-lasting effects were investigated at 4 h after injury and on Postnatal Day 40. At the acute stage, a transient decrease in binding was found in several specific brain areas, hypothalamus, amygdaloid nuclei, entorhinal cortex, perirhinal cortex, and hippocampus, and no differences were found in temporal cortex, thalamus, and geniculate nucleus, when compared to sham-treated animals. At this early age, there was no increase of binding when slices from both groups were incubated in the presence of glutamate and glycine (Glu/Gly), positive allosteric modulators of MK-801 binding. In the 40-day-old brains, the binding to the NMDA receptors of hypoxiatreated animals was not different with respect to controls in most of the areas studied, but the Glu/Gly stimulation of binding in hypoxic rats showed a reduced, or absent, response to the allosteric modulators. In contrast, control rats showed a remarkable increase of the specific binding induced by the presence of the modulators in the incubation buffer. Binding of (+)-3-[125I]MK-801 was also performed at a higher concentration to clarify whether the altered response to Glu/Gly may be due to differences in the number of channels; however, the density of NMDA receptors at this concentration was similar in both control and hypoxia-treated rats. We conclude that the effect of exposure of newborn rats to hypoxia can generate acute and long-lasting effects on the NMDA receptor. The deleterious action of this kind of noxa on the CNS could be exerted by interference with normal glutamatergic transmission and hence over normal growth and development.