Firstly, the noetic value of the ontogenetic approach to the problems of learning and memory is emphasized; then the heterochrony and uneven time course of the development of neural systems are accentuated, which fully holds for the basic cognitive functions. Contrary to a broadly accepted opinion, that inhibitory learning develops later in the ontogeny, using a special method of passive avoidance (with gentle air flow inciting the new-born animal to move), the ability of new-born rats to learn an inhibitory reaction even several hours after delivery and remember it for 24 hr has been proven; special control experiments have excluded any possibility that it is a non-specific reaction. To get it, the specific features of the neonatal organism are to be considered and its functional capabilities not to be overlooked. This conditioned reaction as well as its 24 hr memory develops with a temporary reversal during several postnatal days, needing decreasing numbers of trials to meet the criteria. In the analysis of their mechanisms, it has been shown that adequate functioning of peripheral receptor zones providing afferent inputs from somatosensory areas of the conditioned stimulus is considerably involved in their establishment. Increased dendritic branching has been found in hippocampus and Meynert nucleus the following day after learning in the neonatal period. Special attention is devoted to the involvement of transmitters and/or modulators; the action of acetylcholine, noradrenaline, dopamine and nitric oxide has been discovered during the first postnatal hours; their application after meeting criteria displays a time and age dependent effect with a general characteristic of memory improvement. Neonatal learning under nitric oxide influence changes nitric oxide-synthase content in the brain. Increasing dopamine and nitric oxide availability in the brain improves both learning and memory, and their joint application positively alleviates these phenomena further. Dopamine and its D1 receptor agonists counterbalance decreased nitric oxide after nitric oxide synthase blockade; increased nitric oxide in brain and dopamine receptor antagonists similarly counterbalance each other.