Although acute electrocorticography (ECoG) is routinely performed during epilepsy surgery there is little evidence that the extent of the discharging regions is a useful guide to tailoring the resection or that the findings are predictive of outcome or pathology. Patterns of discharge propagation have, however, rarely been considered in assessing the ECoG. We hypothesize that regions where discharges show earliest peaks ('leading regions') are located in the epileptogenic zone, whereas sites in which late, secondary, propagated activity occurs have less epileptogenic potential and do not need to be excised. To allow intraoperative topographic ECoG analysis, a computer program has been developed to identify leading regions and the sites showing greatest rates or amplitudes of spikes. Their topography has been compared retrospectively with pathology and seizure control in 42 consecutive patients following temporal lobe surgery. Leading regions were most often found in the hippocampus, the subtemporal cortex and the superior temporal gyrus. The most common propagation patterns were from hippocampus to subtemporal cortex and vice versa. There was no association between seizure outcome and the location of regions with greatest incidence or amplitude of spikes or location of leading regions. There was, however, a strong and significant association between poor outcome and non-removal of leading regions other than those in the posterior subtemporal cortex. All leading regions (other than posterior subtemporal) were resected in 27 patients of whom 25 had a favourable outcome. Leading regions (other than posterior subtemporal) remained in 14 patients of whom only four had a good outcome. One patient had no epileptiform activity in the ECoG and good outcome. Persistent posterior subtemporal leading regions remained in nine subjects; all had favourable outcome (Grades I or II) but only three were seizure free. These results suggest that: (i) interictal epileptiform discharges may originate from a complex interaction between separate regions, resulting in propagation and recruitment of neuronal activity along specific neural pathways; (ii) removal of all discharging areas appears unnecessary to achieve seizure control provided that leading regions (other than posterior subtemporal) are removed; and (iii) identification of such leading regions could be used to tailor resections in order to improve seizure control and reduce neurological, neuropsychological and psychiatric post-surgical morbidity.