Since ischemic insults lead to a deregulation of nitric oxide production which contributes to delayed neuronal death, we investigated changes in the distribution and amount of nitric oxide synthases I and II and in the appearance of nitrotyrosine caused by small, well-defined photothrombic lesions (2 mm in diameter) in the somatosensory cortex of rats. Four hours after lesioning, cell loss was evident in the core of the lesion and no nitric oxide synthase was present within this area, indicating that neurons expressing nitric oxide synthase I were lost or that nitric oxide synthase I was degraded. No increase in the number of neurons expressing nitric oxide synthase I was visible in the area surrounding the lesion, nor in other parts of the brain. One day after lesioning, NADPH-diaphorase- and nitric oxide synthase II-positive leucocytes had invaded the perilesional cortex and were accumulated in injured blood vessels. By two to three days post-lesion, layer V and VI pyramidal neurons, microglia, astrocytes and invading leucocytes had become strongly immunoreactive for nitric oxide synthase II within a perilesional rim. The number of cells expressing nitric oxide synthase I remained stable. Nitric oxide synthase II immunoreactivity and related NADPH-diaphorase had decreased by seven days post-lesion in most animals. However, the number of activated microglia or macrophages and astrocytes, as revealed by other markers, remained elevated. In addition, nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity was evident in the blood vessels close to the lesion, as well as in the ipsilateral hippocampus and thalamus. These findings indicate that no perilesional changes in the number of neurons expressing nitric oxide synthase I occur, but that a transient increase in nitric oxide synthase II does take place in the aftermath of small cortical lesions. The results suggest that increased nitric oxide production is limited to certain post-lesional intervals in this experimental model. It is also obvious that the vast majority of nitric oxide synthase-positive cells are nitric oxide synthase II-containing astrocytes three days after lesioning, suggesting that astrocyte-derived nitric oxide plays a significant role in delayed neuronal death. Such a condition points to an important aspect of post-lesional astrocytosis.