Transient changes in immediate-early genes and neurotrophin expression produced by kindling stimulation may mediate secondary downstream events involved in kindling development. Recent experiments have demonstrated conclusively that both kindling progression and mossy fibre sprouting are significantly impaired by administration of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist MK801. To further examine the link between kindling, changes in gene expression and the NMDA receptor, we examined the effects of MK801 on neuronal induction of immediate-early genes, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and trk receptor mRNA expression produced by a single electrically induced hippocampal after-discharge in rats. The after-discharge produced a rapid (after 1 h) increase in Fos, Jun-B, c-Jun, Krox-24 mRNA and protein and Krox-20 protein in dentate granule neurons and a delayed, selective expression of Fos, Jun-D and Krox-24 in hilar interneurons. MK801 pretreatment produced a very strong inhibition of Fos, Jun-D and Krox-20 increases in dentate neurons but had a much smaller effect on Jun-B and c-Jun expression. MK801 did not inhibit Krox-24 expression in granule neurons or the delayed expression of Fos, Jun-D and Krox-24 in hilar interneurons. BDNF protein and trk B and trk C mRNA expression were also strongly induced in dentate granule cells 4 h following an after-discharge. MK801 abolished the increase in BDNF protein and trk B, but not trk C mRNA in granule cells at 4 h. These results demonstrate that MK801 differentially regulates the AD-increased expression of a group of genes previously identified as being likely candidates for an involvement in kindling. Because MK801 significantly retards the development of kindling and mossy fibre sprouting, it can be argued that those genes whose induction is not significantly attenuated by MK801 are unlikely to play an important role in the MK801-sensitive component of kindling and the changes in neural connectivity (mossy fibre sprouting) associated with kindling. Conversely, the role in kindling of those genes whose expression was significantly attenuated by MK801 (Fos, Jun-D, Krox-20, trkB and BDNF) requires further examination.