Large-animal models offer several advantages in the study of cerebral ischaemia: easier control of physiological variables, easier neuropathological evaluation, etc. In the present study we have taken advantage of the unique cerebrovascular anatomy of the goat to reproduce a model of reversible, incomplete, global cerebral ischaemia in a large-sized animal species, in which the effects of successive manoeuvres to stop and re-start cerebral blood flow can be recorded continuously. Early cortical laser-Doppler flow response (up to 2 h) and delayed neuronal degeneration (7 days) in the hippocampal CA1 subfield have been analysed in goats undergoing 5, 10 or 20 min of transient, global cerebral ischaemia. Bilateral occlusion of the external carotid artery plus compression of jugular veins reduced cortical laser-Doppler flow to 11 +/- 8% of preischaemic values (P<0.01), flattened the electrocorticogram, and increased mean arterial blood pressure by 17 +/- 23% (P<0.01) and intracranial pressure by 161 +/- 136% (P<0.01). A rather heterogeneous response was obtained during reperfusion: 14 out of 31 goats showed the "classical" pattern consisting of hyperaemia followed by delayed hypoperfusion. The remaining goats showed neither hyperaemia (11 goats) nor delayed hypoperfusion (6 goats). The duration of the ischaemic insult did not correlate with the magnitude of hyperaemia or delayed hypoperfusion, but influenced neurodegeneration: while no loss of hippocampal CA1 neurons was observed at 7 days after 5 or 10 min ischaemia, a 68% cell loss was observed in the 20-min ischaemia group. Our goat model has thus proven to be very suitable for the induction of global cerebral ischaemia in a large-animal species without extensive surgery. It allows reproducible reductions of cerebral blood flow, long-term recovery, low mortality rate, and high incidence of neuronal damage. The results reported here support the view that delayed hypoperfusion is not an important determinant of neuronal injury.