The involvement of platelet-activating factor (PAF) in cell damage induced by ischemia/postischemia-like conditions was studied in a hippocampus-derived cell line, HN33.11. Cells exposed to N2-saturated glucose-free HEPES-buffered saline (ischemia) for 5 h followed by 18 h of incubation in serum-free control medium (postischemia reincubation) remained 67.4 +/- 2.4% viable in comparison with sham-treated cells. Analysis of DNA fragmentation in combination with Hoechst 33258 staining indicates that apoptosis is the dominant mode of cell death in the present model. PAF level during 10 h of ischemia was unchanged. However, an increase in PAF accumulation was found early during the reincubation period that followed 5 h of ischemia. Peak PAF concentrations were noted at 2 h after initiation of reincubation and rapidly declined to control level after 7 h of reincubation. Consistent with a role of PAF in mediating cell death under ischemia/postischemia reincubation in this model, the PAF antagonist BN 50739 exerted a dose-dependent protective effect. Maximal protection (85.7 +/- 5.4%) of the cells from ischemia/reincubation-induced cell damage was achieved at 0.1 microM BN 50739. The PAF antagonist lacked any protective effect against ischemia-induced cell death. On the other hand, the addition of the stable PAF analogue 1-O-hexadecyl-2-N-methylcarbamyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (MC-PAF) at the onset of ischemia potentiated ischemia/reincubation-induced apoptosis--an effect that was blocked by BN 50739. Pretreatment of HN33.11 cells with the Ca2+ chelator 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N,N-tetraacetic acid acetoxymethyl ester (BAPTA-AM) also provided a protective effect against ischemia/reincubation-induced cell damage. BAPTA-AM increased cell viability by 50%. Pretreatment with BAPTA-AM also decreased ischemia/reincubation-induced PAF accumulation in HN33.11 cells. The results suggest that PAF, acting via a PAF receptor, is at least in part mediating apoptosis under ischemia/postischemia-like conditions in HN33.11 cells.