In the present study the neuroprotective effect of mild hypothermia (decrease of temperature from 37 degrees C to 33 degrees C) during and after transient ischemia in brain tissue at different stages of development was tested in vitro by measuring energy metabolism, glutamate release and protein biosynthesis rate (PSR) in hippocampal slices. Slices were taken from immature (E40) and mature (E60) guinea pig fetuses and adult guinea pigs. The slices were exposed to ischemia-like conditions (oxygen/glucose deprivation, OGD) for periods of between 10 to 40 min followed by a 2-h or 12-h recovery phase. During OGD, mild hypothermia slowed down the depletion of energy stores only in slices from immature fetuses, but had no effect on slices prepared from mature fetuses and adult animals. Hypothermia also reduced glutamate release significantly during oxygen/glucose deprivation. Lowering temperature to 33 degrees C had no effect on energy metabolism and only a minor effect on PSR of slices from mature fetuses and adult animals subjected to 2 h of recovery. However, 12 h after OGD PSR was markedly improved by mild hypothermia in slices from mature animals and in slices from adults that had been exposed to OGD for only 20 or 30 min. The inhibition of PSR was more severe in the slices from adults than in those from mature fetuses subjected to the same duration of OGD. Age- and temperature-related differences in glutamate release during OGD did not fully agree with corresponding disparities in the values for PSR obtained 12 h after OGD. These results indicate that the neuroprotective effect of mild hypothermia was not mediated by a temperature-dependent retardation of the depletion of energy stores during OGD. Age-related disparities in the vulnerability of the brain to ischemia and the neuroprotective efficiency of mild hypothermia appear to be only partially reflected by the varying levels of glutamate release during ischemia but best reflected by the extent of PSR inhibition. It is concluded that mild hypothermia may be a suitable therapeutical intervention for the suppression of hypoxic-ischemic cell damage during birth.