Inhibitory post-synaptic potentials (IPSPs) were studied in neurons of presubiculum, parasubiculum and medial entorhinal cortex in horizontal slices from rat brains. Isolated IPSPs were evoked by extracellular electrical stimuli in the presence of glutamate receptor antagonists. Cellular morphology was identified using Neurobiotin labeling. IPSPs were compared: (a) across morphological cell types, (b) across laminae within regions, and (c) across regions. IPSPs were visible in stellate and pyramidal cells from layers II, III, and V of all retrohippocampal areas during bath application of glutamate antagonists. Qualitative and quantitative differences in IPSPs were only found when comparing responses by superficial layer II, III cells to responses by deep layer V cells. Responses by stellate and pyramidal cells within the same or adjacent layers did not differ, nor did responses differ from region to region. All cell types exhibited an early hyperpolarizing response. The majority (85%) of superficial layer cells in all regions, regardless of cell shape, exhibited a second hyperpolarizing component. Fewer (50%) deep layer cells exhibited the late peak with similar long latencies. IPSPs were typically larger in superficial layer cells. IPSPs were comprised of GABAA and GABAB (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor-mediated components. With repetitive stimulation, the peak amplitude of the GABAA receptor-mediated component decreased with successive stimuli, but stabilized during the first five or fewer stimuli to a level that did not vary with stimulation frequency. The GABAB receptor-mediated component also stabilized, but the final amplitude appeared to decrease as the stimulation frequency increased. With high-frequency repetitive stimulation, both components of the IPSP showed summation. We conclude that the most meaningful distinction for IPSPs among retrohippocampal neurons is a laminar distinction, between superficial and deep layer neurons, and not one across cell shape or retrohippocampal subregion. These laminar differences can contribute to synchronous activity by deep layer neurons and restrict the activity of superficial layer neurons.