Morphometric estimation of neuronal processes is currently laborious and time-consuming, since the individual processes (axons and dendrites) have to be traced manually. In order to facilitate the measurement of cellular processes, we have tested a series of parameters derived from the contour and the convex hull of an object and estimated to which extent they reflect process length and number. The parameters included the area, perimeter and form factor of the object and convex hull, their ratios as well as object length, breadth, width, length/width and spreading index. Some new parameters derived from the contour and convex hull of the object, were also computed: process index (the number of areas contained within the convex hull outside the object contour), process domain (the total area contained within the convex hull outside the object contour), their ratio and the square root of the process domain (SR process domain). In total, 18 parameters were estimated. Populations of motoneurons, growth cones of cerebellar granule cells and N2a neuroblastoma cells were utilized due to their diversity in morphological features. The processes of each object were drawn by hand to establish the actual length and number. Total process length per object correlated strongly with object perimeter, process domain and SR process domain. The number of processes per object correlated well with perimeter ratio, process index and form factor, whereas object length, convex hull perimeter and spreading index correlated acceptably with the average process length. Using these parameters for the evaluation of neurite outgrowth in developing of hippocampal neurons in vitro, variables such as object perimeter, process domain and SR process domain were found to be very well suited for estimation of the total length of neurites. We conclude that based on the contour and convex hull of an object it is possible to calculate a series of parameters which may substitute direct measurements of process length.