The comprehension of activities and functions of complex brain structures requires, among other things, information on simultaneous activities in several regions. Results reported in the literature using multi(micro/macro)electrode recordings or imaging techniques provide incomplete information due either to the small size and/or small number of investigated regions or to the poor spatiotemporal resolution, respectively. This is particularly true for the hippocampus and its subfields, and mathematical modeling and computer simulation have been used with the aim of obtaining information when this is lacking. Global activities in the CA3 field of the hippocampus, and in particular the genesis of theta rhythm and sharp waves, have been investigated here by a mathematical model formulated within the frame of a kinetic theory of neural systems. The model has taken into account data of experimental results both on different PSPs recorded in hippocampal neurons and on recurrent pyramidal collateral geometries. The computational 'experiments' to which the model was subjected suggest that the sharp waves arise through a selective and short block of the fast inhibitory neurons of CA3, produced by a medial septum inhibitory input, whereas the theta activity is produced by a durable, continuous inhibition of the slow inhibitory neurons. Information obtained also suggests that the recurrent pyramidal collaterals subserve a competitive, rather than a cooperative, organization. Based on these results a hypothesis on the possible functional organization of the CA3 field and of the entire hippocampus has been formulated. According to this hypothesis, the CA3 imposes a serial order on the flow of activity arriving at the hippocampus from the entorhinal cortex and from its connected polymodal cortical regions. This ordering permits cortical activities, arriving at CA3 on appropriate time intervals, to produce effects in regions of brain to which the CA3 projects. The competing cortical activities are lost.