Topiramate, a novel antiepileptic drug, inhibits the seizures of spontaneously epileptic rat (SER), a double mutant (zi/zi, tm/tm) which exhibits both tonic convulsion and absence-like seizures from the age of 8-weeks. Hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons in SER show a long-lasting depolarization shift with accompanying repetitive firing when a single electrostimulation is delivered to the mossy fibers in vitro. The effects of topiramate on the excitability of CA3 pyramidal neurons in SER were examined to elucidate the mechanism underlying the antiepileptic action. Intracellular recordings were performed in 23 hippocampal slice preparations of 16 SER aged 8-17 weeks. Topiramate (10-100 microM) dose-dependently inhibited the depolarizing shifts with repetitive firing induced by mossy fiber stimulation without affecting the first spike and resting membrane potentials in hippocampal CA3 neurons of SER. Higher dose of topiramate (100 microM) sometimes inhibited the first spike, and decreased excitatory postsynaptic potentials in the SER CA3 neurons. However, topiramate up to 100 microM did not affect the single action potential elicited by the stimulation in the hippocampal CA3 neurons of age-matched Wistar rat devoid of the seizure. Application of topiramate (100 microM) did not significantly affect the firing induced by depolarizing pulse applied in the CA3 neurons of the SER. In addition, topiramate (100 microM) had no effects on the Ca2+ spike induced by intracellularly applied depolarizing pulse in the presence of tetrodotoxin and tetraethylammonium. In contrast, a dose-dependent inhibition of depolarization and repetitive firing induced by bath application of glutamate in CA3 pyramidal neurons was obtained with topiramate (10-100 microM). Furthermore, topiramate (100 microM) decreased the number of miniature postsynaptic potential of CA3 pyramidal neurons of SER. In patch clamp whole cell recording using acutely dissociated hippocampal CA3 neurons from SER aged 8-weeks and age-matched normal Wistar rats, there were no remarkable effects on voltage dependent Ca2+ current with topiramate up to 300 microM in either animal; the current was completely blocked by Cd2+ at a concentration of 1 mM. These findings suggest that topiramate inhibits release of glutamate from the nerve terminals and/or abnormal firing of the CA3 pyramidal neurons of SER by mainly blocking glutamate receptors in the neurons.