The possible roles for nitric oxide produced by neurons in epileptic conditions have been investigated from two different aspects: microcirculation and delayed damage. Our aim was to determine whether the selective inhibition of neuronal (type 1) nitric oxide synthase by 7-nitroindazole, during seizures induced by systemic kainate, modifies hippocampal blood flow and oxygen supply and influences the subsequent hippocampal damage. Experiments were performed in conscious Wistar rats whose electroencephalogram was recorded. 7-Nitroindazole (25 mg/kg, i.p.) or its vehicle was injected 30 min before kainate administration (10 mg/kg, i.p.) and then twice at 1-h intervals. Kainate triggered typical limbic seizures evolving into status epilepticus, identified by uninterrupted electroencephalographic spike activity. The seizures were stopped by diazepam (5 mg/kg, i.p.) after 1 h of status epilepticus. Three types of experiments were performed in vehicle- and 7-nitroindazole-treated rats. (1) Hippocampal nitric oxide synthase activity was measured under basal conditions, at 1 h after the onset of the status epilepticus and at 24 h after its termination (n = 4-6 per group). (2) Hippocampal blood flow and tissue partial pressure of oxygen were measured simultaneously by mass spectrometry for the whole duration of the experiment, while systemic variables and body temperature were monitored (n = 6 per group). (3) Hippocampal damage was revealed by Cresyl Violet staining and evaluated with a lesion score seven days after status epilepticus (n = 12 per group). Hippocampal nitric oxide synthase activity was not significantly modified during status epilepticus or the following day in vehicle-treated rats. In contrast, it was inhibited by 57% in 7-nitroindazole-treated rats, both in basal conditions and after 1 h of status epilepticus, but was not different from its basal level 24 h later. 7-Nitroindazole significantly decreased basal hippocampal blood flow and tissue partial pressure in oxygen by 30% and 35%, respectively without affecting any systemic or thermal variable. During status epilepticus, 7-nitroindazole significantly reduced the increase in hippocampal blood flow by 70% and prevented any increase in the tissue partial pressure of oxygen. Seven days later, the hippocampal damage in the CA1 and CA3 layers was significantly less in 7-nitroindazole-treated rats than in vehicle-treated rats. These results indicate that the inhibition of neuronal nitric oxide synthase by 7-nitroindazole protects neurons from seizure-induced toxicity despite reducing blood flow and oxygen supply to the hippocampus.