Neurocalcin (NC) is a recently described calcium-binding protein isolated and characterized from bovine brain. NC belongs to the neural calcium-sensor proteins defined by the photoreceptor cell-specific protein recoverin that have been proposed to be involved in the regulation of calcium-dependent phosphorylation in signal transduction pathways. We analyzed the distribution and morphology of the NC-immunoreactive (IR) neurons in the rat dorsal hippocampus and the coexistence of NC with GABA and different neurochemical markers which label perisomatic inhibitory cells [parvalbumin (PV) and cholecystokinin (CCK)], mid-proximal dendritic inhibitory cells [calbindin D28k (CB)], distal dendritic inhibitory cells [somatostatin (SOM) and neuropeptide Y (NPY)], and interneurons specialized to innervate other interneurons [calretinin (CR) and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)]. NC-IR cells were present in all layers of the dentate gyrus and hippocampal fields. In the dentate gyrus, NC-IR cells were concentrated in the granule cell layer, especially in the hilar border, whereas in the CA fields they were most frequently found in the stratum radiatum. NC-IR cells were morphologically heterogeneous and exhibited distinctive features of non-principal cells. In the dentate gyrus, pyramidal-like, multipolar and fusiform (horizontal and vertical) cells were found. In the CA3 region most NC-IR cells were multipolar, but vertical and horizontal fusiform cells also appeared. In the CA1 region, where NC-IR cells showed most frequently vertically arranged dendrites, multipolar, bitufted and fusiform (vertical and horizontal) cells could be distinguished. All the NC-IR cells were found to be GABA-IR in all hippocampal layers and regions, and they represented about 19% of the GABA-positive cells. NC/CB, NC/CR and NC/VIP double-labeled cells were found in all hippocampal regions, and represented 29%, 24% and 18% of the NC-IR cells, respectively. NC and CCK did not coexist in the dentate gyrus; however, 9% of the NC-IR cells in the CA fields also contained CCK. No coexistence of NC with PV, SOM or NPY was found in any hippocampal region. We conclude that NC is exclusively expressed by interneurons in the rat hippocampus. NC-IR cells are a morphologically and neurochemically heterogeneous subset of GABAergic non-principal cells, which, on the basis of the known termination pattern of the colocalizing markers, are also functionally heterogeneous and are mainly involved in feed-forward dendritic inhibition in the commissural-associational and Schaffer collateral termination zones (CB containing cells), in innervation of other interneurons (CR- and VIP-containing cells), and in perisomatic inhibition (CCK-containing cells). NC is never present in perisomatic inhibitory PV-containing cells, or in feed-back distal dendritic inhibitory SOM/NPY-containing cells.