Long-term potentiation (LTP) is a model of synaptic plasticity believed to encompass the underlying neurobiological mechanisms that support memory function. Chronic developmental lead (Pb) exposure is known to be associated with cognitive dysfunction in children and animals. Disruption of the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) has been reported in the hippocampus following chronic exposure to environmentally relevant levels of Pb in rats. Under urethane anesthesia, we have previously observed Pb-induced increases in the threshold for LTP induction. With higher train intensities, LTP was induced and no declines in the amplitude of responses within a 60-min posttrain period were evident. The present study was designed to assess the effects of Pb on the more enduring forms of LTP in the dentate gyrus of the conscious rat. Beginning in the late gestational period, rats were chronically exposed to 0.2% Pb(2+)-acetate through the drinking water of the pregnant dam, and directly through their own water supply at weaning. As adults, electrodes were permanently implanted in male offspring and field potentials evoked by perforant path stimulation were recorded from the dentate gyrus over several weeks. LTP was induced by delivering theta-burst patterned stimulation at a maximal stimulus intensity through the perforant path electrode, and input/output (I/O) functions were monitored for 1 month. Population spike (PS) amplitude was increased maximally 1 h after train delivery. The time constant of decay (tau) calculated from pooled data for each group yielded declines in PS amplitude by 63% in 17.4 days in controls and 13.4 days in Pb-exposed animals. Quantitative estimates of decay in individual animals were achieved in two ways: (1) by calculating difference scores in I/O functions from the maximal LTP at 1 h, and (2) by interpolating day to decay by 63% from declines from maximal LTP. The interpolated values were used to compare the incidence of animals showing decay of 63% within 1 week posttrain. Both analyses revealed a more accelerated rate of decay of LTP in animals developmentally exposed to Pb relative to controls. Endurance of potentiated responses for days to weeks is believed to be supported by structural modifications and synaptic growth. The reported effects of Pb on growth-related processes may thus contribute to a reduced persistence of LTP and the resulting cognitive deficits engendered by developmental Pb exposure.