Two different types of corticoid receptor molecules bind circulating corticosterone in brain: mineralocorticoid receptors (MR) and glucocorticoid receptors. MR exhibit the highest affinity for the endogenous glucocorticoid in the rat, corticosterone. During development, low corticosterone levels influence neurogenesis, and these effects are probably MR mediated. Three MR complementary DNA clones, alpha, beta, and gamma, have been identified in the rodent. All of these MR complementary DNA clones have identical coding regions, but differ significantly at the 5'-untranslated end. Although the functional significance of these three messenger RNA (mRNA) species remains unknown, one hypothesis is that they reflect the ability of the brain to regulate the expression of MR, allowing multiple factors to differentially control transcription in a tissue- and time-specific manner. To investigate this possibility, we examined the presence of these distinct mRNA forms in the developing rat hippocampus (HC). In situ hybridization with specific alpha, beta, and gamma complementary RNA probes was performed in the HC of 3-, 5-, 7-, 12-, 14-, 28-, 35-, and 65-day-old animals. We found that there is differential expression of these forms in each of the HC subfields from infancy to adulthood. y expression appears to be associated with periods of cell birth and increased axonal sprouting. beta expression, on the other hand, may be best linked to periods of synaptogenesis, growth of commissural and associative terminal fields, and possibly active pruning. To explore the possibility that the differential gene expression may be related to corticosterone environment, adrenalectomy was performed. A rapid modulation of the MR mRNA variants (14 h) in an age- and site-specific fashion was seen. These findings suggest that the variation in expression and regulation during development of the multiple MR transcripts could reflect a complex pattern of developmental regulation that may involve a multitude of factors unique to each postnatal age and to the different neuronal populations within the hippocampal formation.