Several lines of evidence indicate a critical role of the piriform cortex (PC) in the kindling model of temporal lobe epilepsy, suggesting that the PC is part of an epileptic network that is pivotal in the genesis of kindling, facilitating, and intensifying the spread of seizures from a focus in amygdala, hippocampus, or other limbic brain regions to cortical and subcortical regions. Kindling of the amygdala has been shown to induce long-lasting changes in synaptic efficacy in the ipsilateral PC comparable to abnormalities seen in epileptic foci, but the neurochemical alterations possibly underlying these functional changes are not known. The possibility that the enhanced excitability of the PC in response to kindling is related to a reduction of GABAergic neurotransmission prompted us to examine if a lasting reduction in GABA-immunoreactive PC neurons is detectable after kindling of the basolateral amygdala (BLA) in rats. Furthermore, GABA immunoreactivity was determined in the BLA in order to investigate whether GABAergic neurons decrease in focal tissue, as previously suggested by neurochemical and immunocytochemical studies in amygdala-kindled rats. Three groups of age-matched rats were used: (1) a group of rats that was kindled via electrical stimulation by a bipolar electrode implanted in the right BLA, (2) a group of BLA-implanted but nonstimulated rats, and (3) a group of non-implanted, naive control rats. The kindled rats were sacrificed 40 days after the last fully kindled seizure. The two other groups of rats were sacrificed together with the kindled rats on the same days, and tissues from kindled and control rats were treated concurrently throughout the immunohistochemical analysis. GABA neurons were stained by a monoclonal antibody to GABA. Kindling of the BLA led to a pronounced decrease in the number of GABA immunoreactive neurons in the ipsi- and contralateral BLA at all section levels examined. In the PC, no significant differences between groups were seen in the contralateral hemisphere, while a significant reduction in GABA immunoreactive cells was observed in the transition zone between anterior and posterior PC in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the BLA electrode. The present findings add to the accumulating evidence that the PC is critically involved in kindling-induced epileptogenesis. The data furthermore substantiate that the PC is not a homogeneous structure but that there are differences along the anterior-posterior axis of this region in neurochemical (and most certainly also functional) consequences in response to kindling stimulation from other limbic brain regions.