1. When perfused with a medium containing no added magnesium and 4-aminopyridine (4AP) (50 microM) hippocampal slices generated epileptiform bursts of an interictal nature. We have shown in a previous study that adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) depressed epileptiform activity and that this effect was blocked by the adenosine A1 receptor antagonist cyclopentyltheophylline but was not affected by adenosine deaminase. This implied that ATP might act indirectly at P1 receptors or at a xanthine-sensitive P2 receptor. The aim of the present study was to investigate further the action of ATP on epileptiform activity. 2. ATP can be metabolized by ecto-nucleotidases to adenosine 5'-diphosphate (ADP), adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP) and adenosine, respectively. Each of these metabolites can activate receptors in its own right: P2 receptors for ADP and P1 receptors for AMP and adenosine. 3. We now show that both AMP and ATP (50 microM) significantly decrease epileptiform discharge rate in a rapid and reversible manner. 5'Adenylic acid deaminase (AMP deaminase, AMPase) (0.2 u ml(-1)), when perfused alone did not significantly alter the discharge rate over the 10 min superfusion period used for drug application. When perfused concurrently with AMP (50 microM), AMP deaminase prevented the depressant effect of AMP on discharge rate. 4. AMP deaminase, at a concentration of 0.2 u ml(-1) which annulled the effect of AMP (50 microM), prevented the inhibitory activity of ATP (50 microM). A higher concentration of ATP (200 microM) depressed the frequency of spontaneous bursts to approximately 30% control and this response was also prevented by AMP deaminase. 5. Superfusion of the slices with 5'-nucleotidase also prevented the inhibitory activity of ATP on epileptiform discharges. 6. The results suggest that AMP mediates the inhibitory effects of ATP on epileptiform activity, a conclusion which can explain the earlier finding that cyclopentyltheophylline but not adenosine deaminase inhibited the effect of ATP. A corollary to this is that, when examining the pharmacology of ATP, care must be taken to inactivate AMP with AMP deaminase, as well as adenosine with adenosine deaminase, before a direct action of ATP on P1 receptors can be postulated. Failure to do so may have led to erroneous conclusions in some previous studies of nucleotide activity on nucleotide receptors.