Kynurenic acid is an excitatory amino acid antagonist with preferential activity at the N-methyl-D-aspartate subtype of glutamate receptors. It is produced endogenously in the brain, but is synthesized more effectively in the periphery. The influence of peripheral kynurenic acid on brain function is unclear because kynurenic acid is likely to penetrate the blood-brain barrier poorly. To determine the potential central effects of peripheral kynurenic acid, we compared its effects in the hippocampus after peripheral or direct administration. The hippocampus of the rat was chosen as a test system because this region receives glutamatergic inputs, and because responses to stimulation of these inputs can be compared after peripheral drug administration in vivo, and after direct administration of drugs in vitro. Peripherally-administered kynurenic acid was injected via a catheter in the jugular vein. Bath-application to hippocampal slices was used to test effects of direct administration. Area CA1 pyramidal cells and dentate gyrus granule cells were examined by extracellular recording and stimulation of area CA3 or the perforant path, respectively. Pairs of identical stimuli were used to assess paired-pulse inhibition and paired-pulse facilitation. Kynurenic acid decreased evoked responses in area CA1 and the dentate gyrus, both in vivo and in vitro. Effective concentrations were in the low micromolar range, and therefore were likely to be mediated by antagonism of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. In both preparations, area CA1 was more sensitive than the dentate gyrus, and paired-pulse facilitation was affected, but not paired-pulse inhibition. Control solutions had no effect. We conclude that kynurenic acid can enter the brain after peripheral administration, and that peripheral and direct effects in the hippocampus are qualitatively similar. Therefore, we predict that effects of endogenous kynurenic acid that was synthesized peripherally or centrally would be similar. Furthermore, the results suggest that modulation of the glycine site of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, for example by kynurenic acid, may vary considerably among different brain areas.