This review focuses on experiments in humans examining the regulation of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) system during nocturnal sleep. The HPA system is a most important mediator of the organism's response to stress. The early phase of nocturnal sleep dominated by extended epochs of slow wave sleep (SWS), is the only time of day in which secretory activity of this axis is subject to a pronounced and persistent inhibition resulting in minimum concentrations of ACTH and cortisol. During late sleep predominated by rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. HPA secretory activity reaches a diurnal maximum. Comparison of the response to administration of exogenous secretagogues of ACTH in men during sleep and nocturnal wakefulness indicated that early sleep, and in particular SWS, is associated with an inhibition of pituitary-adrenocortical responsiveness, which is presumably due to hypothalamic secretion of an as yet unknown release inhibiting factor of ACTH. Pituitary-adrenocortical responsiveness during early sleep was disinhibited after canrenoate which is a selective blocker of mineralocorticoid receptors (MR) located primarily in limbic-hippocampal structures. Hippocampal neuronal networks are known to integrate corticosteroid feedback via both, the MR and the classical glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Prevailing MR related activity in this network seems to act as a trigger for the inhibition of the HPA system. During early sleep, the same hippocampal network appears to be concurrently involved in the formation of declarative memory. Activation of GR after administration of dexamethasone completely blocked the formation of declarative memory during early sleep, indicating that the inhibition of HPA secretory activity is a necessary prerequisite for this memory process. Dysfunction of the described neuro-endocrine mode of regulation during early sleep is present in patients with Cushing's disease, in patients with severe depression and in aged humans. All of these groups show insufficient inhibition of HPA secretory activity particular prominent during early sleep, and reduced SWS in concert with impairments of declarative memory function. First clinical trials suggest that this trias of symptoms may benefit from intranasal treatment with neuropeptides like vasopressin and growth hormone releasing hormone.