Young adult, middle-aged, and old male F-344 rats were assessed for their hippocampal ability. This was accomplished by examining the animals on two different paradigms, each incorporating a simultaneous measure of hippocampal-dependent and -independent processing. The animals were fear conditioned and then tested for retention of the conditioning context and tone. This was followed by an 8-arm radial maze task which combined spatial working and cued reference memory elements. The two paradigms are compared in terms of task demands, potential confounds, and validity for aging studies. The results indicate that the performance of the animals on the two tasks is correlated. Age-related deficits limited to the hippocampal aspects of the above tasks were found, with no deficits found in the analogous but hippocampus-independent aspects of these tasks. The function of the hippocampus in incorporating new memories is time-related. Therefore, the possibility of age-related changes in consolidation was examined. It has previously been shown on the fear conditioning paradigm that the hippocampus is involved in retention of the aversive context for approximately 28 days. In the present study, an attempt was made to test the animals for retention of the conditioning context both early into the period of consolidation (10 days) and after consolidation should have been completed (52 days). The results indicate that, initially, the old animals show comparable retention to young rats. When examined later, young animals showed a stronger retention of the conditioning context than they had previously. The aged rats, however, did not seem to benefit from this additional period of time and in fact showed a decrease in retention of the conditioning context. The data are interpreted in terms of consolidation, alternative explanations of the data are presented, and suggestions are given for future research. Finally, the implications of such age-related changes in hippocampal consolidation on learning and memory are discussed.