The amygdala complex is one component of the temporal lobe that may be damaged unilaterally or bilaterally in children and adults with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) or following status epilepticus. Most MR (magnetic resonance) imaging studies of epileptic patients have shown that volume reduction of the amygdala ranges from 10-30%. In the human amygdala, neuronal loss and gliosis have been reported in the lateral and basal nuclei. Studies in rats have more specifically identified the amygdaloid regions that are sensitive to status epilepticus-induced neuronal damage. These areas include the medial division of the lateral nucleus, the parvicellular division of the basal nucleus, the accessory basal nucleus, the posterior cortical nucleus, and portions of the anterior cortical and medial nuclei. Otherwise, other amygdala nuclei, such as the magnocellular and intermediate divisions of the basal nucleus and the central nucleus, remain relatively well preserved. Amygdala kindling studies in rats have shown that the density of a subpopulation of GABAergic inhibitory neurons that also contain somatostatin may be reduced even after a low number of generalized seizures. While analyses of histological sections and MR images indicate that in approximately 10% of TLE patients, seizure-induced damage is isolated to the amygdala, more often amygdala damage is combined with damage to the hippocampus and/or other brain areas. Moreover, recent data from rodents and nonhuman primates suggest that structural and functional alterations caused by seizure activity originating in the amygdala are not limited to the amygdala itself, but may also affect other temporal lobe structures. The information gathered so far on damage to the amygdala in epilepsy or after status epilepticus suggests that local alterations in inhibitory circuitries may contribute to a lowered seizure threshold and greater excitability within the amygdala. Furthermore, damage to select nuclei in the amygdala may predict impairment of performance in behavioral tasks that depend on the integrity of the amygdaloid circuits.