Kainate is an excitatory neurotransmitter that binds to the kainate and AMPA receptor subtypes of the glutamate receptor and triggers the formation of cation permeable transmembrane channels in these receptors. In the present report the channel-opening mechanism of the AMPA receptors by kainate has been determined in rat hippocampal neurons using two different kinetic methods, namely, the rapid-flow method (cell-flow) with a 10 ms time resolution and a laser-pulse photolysis technique with a approximately 65 microseconds time resolution. The whole-cell currents induced by kainate, using the cell-flow method, are nondesensitizing and inhibited significantly by CNQX and hence pertain to activation of the AMPA receptors and not the kainate receptors. The cell-flow measurements were used to evaluate the constants pertaining to the minimum mechanism that could account for the concentration of the receptor in the open-channel form over a 500-fold range of kainate concentration. These constants, namely, the intrinsic dissociation constant of kainate from the AMPA receptor and the channel-opening equilibrium constant, were determined to be 140 +/- 30 microM and 8 +/- 2, respectively. On the other hand, the kinetics of the steps leading to channel opening was evaluated using the laser-pulse photolysis techniques. In this technique whole-cell currents were obtained by releasing kainate in the submillisecond time scale near the cell by photolysis of N-(alpha-carboxy-2-nitrobenzyl) kainate. The concentration of the released kainate was calculated by comparing the whole-cell currents obtained from the laser-pulse photolysis experiments with the whole currents obtained with 100 microM kainate on the same cell using cell-flow measurements. The rate constants for channel opening and closing were then determined from the observed rate constants for the current rise obtained as a function of kainate concentration. These rates were 5000 +/- 2000 and 640 +/- 30 s-1, respectively. The rate and equilibrium constants obtained in the present report allow an evaluation of the fraction of the receptors in the open-channel form as a function of time and kainate concentration, hence providing insight into the role of kainate in neuronal signal transmission.