Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction are implicated in the neuronal cell death that occurs in physiological settings and in neurodegenerative disorders. In Alzheimer's disease (AD) degenerating neurons are associated with deposits of amyloid beta-peptide (A beta), and there is evidence for increased membrane lipid peroxidation and protein oxidation in the degenerating neurons. Cell culture studies have shown that A beta can disrupt calcium homeostasis and induce apoptosis in neurons by a mechanism involving oxidative stress. We now report that catecholamines (norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine) increase the vulnerability of cultured hippocampal neurons to A beta toxicity. The catecholamines were effective in potentiating A beta toxicity at concentrations of 10-200 microM, with the higher concentrations (100-200 microM) themselves inducing cell death. Serotonin and acetylcholine were not neurotoxic and did not modify A beta toxicity. Levels of membrane lipid peroxidation, and cytoplasmic and mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, were increased following exposure to neurons to A beta, and catecholamines exacerbated the oxidative stress. Subtoxic concentrations of catecholamines exacerbated decreases in mitochondrial energy charge and transmembrane potential caused by A beta, and higher concentrations of catecholamines alone induced mitochondrial dysfunction. Antioxidants (vitamin E, glutathione, and propyl gallate) protected neurons against the damaging effects of A beta and catecholamines, whereas the beta-adrenergic receptor antagonist propanolol and the dopamine (D1) receptor antagonist SCH23390 were ineffective. Measurements of intracellular free Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i) showed that A beta induced a slow elevation of [Ca2+]i which was greatly enhanced in cultures cotreated with catecholamines. Collectively, these data indicate a role for catecholamines in exacerbating A beta-mediated neuronal degeneration in AD and, when taken together with previous findings, suggest roles for oxidative stress induced by catecholamines in several different neurodegenerative conditions.